Retinoschisin, the X-linked retinoschisis protein, is a secreted photoreceptor protein, and is expressed and released by Weri-Rb1 cells.
X-linked retinoschisis is characterized by microcystic-like changes of the macular region and schisis within the inner retinal layers, leading to visual deterioration in males. Many missense and protein-truncating mutations of the causative gene RS1 have now been identified and are thought to be inactivating. RS1 encodes a 224 amino acid protein, retinoschisin, which contains a discoidin domain but is of unknown function. We have generated a polyclonal antibody against a peptide from a unique region within retinoschisin, which detects a protein of approximately 28 kDa in retinal samples reduced with dithiothreitol, but multimers sized > 40 kDa under non-reducing conditions. A screen of human tissues with this antibody reveals retinoschisin to be retina specific and the antibody detects a protein of similar size in bovine and murine retinae. We investigated the expression pattern in the retina of both RS1 mRNA (using in situ hybridization with riboprobes) and retinoschisin (using immunohistochemistry). The antisense riboprobe detected RS1 mRNA only in the photoreceptor layer but the protein product of the gene was present both in the photoreceptors and within the inner portions of the retina. Furthermore, differentiated retinoblastoma cells (Weri-Rb1 cells) were found to express RS1 mRNA and to release retinoschisin. These results suggest that retinoschisin is released by photo-receptors and has functions within the inner retinal layers. Thus, X-linked retinoschisis is caused by abnormalities in a putative secreted photoreceptor protein and is the first example of a secreted photo-receptor protein associated with a retinal dystrophy.. 

visual deterioration
X-linked retinoschisis with point mutations in the XLRS1 gene.
BACKGROUND  X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS) is a relatively rare vitreoretinal dystrophy that causes visual loss in young men. Recently, a gene responsible for this disease, designated XLRS1, was identified, and several deleterious gene mutations were reported. OBJECTIVE  To analyze Japanese patients clinically diagnosed as having XLRS formutational changes in the XLRS1 gene. METHODS  Ten patients with XLRS underwent full ophthalmologic examination, including slitlamp biomicroscopy and dilated funduscopy. Genomic DNA was isolated from leukocytes, and all exons of the XLRS1 gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and analyzed using a direct sequencing method. RESULTS  Point mutations in the XLRS1 gene were identified in all 10 patients. The mutations were identical in each of 2 pairs of brothers. Six of the point mutations represented missense mutations, 1 was a nonsense mutation, and 1 was a frameshift mutation. Five of the mutations are newly reported herein. CONCLUSIONS  The discovery of new point mutations in this study increases the available information regarding the spectrum of genetic abnormalities and clinical manifestations of XLRS. However, the limited data failed to reveal a correlation between mutation and disease phenotype. CLINICAL RELEVANCE  Identification of mutations in the XLRS1 gene and expanded information on clinical manifestations will facilitate early diagnosis, appropriate early therapy, and genetic counseling regarding the prognosis of XLRS.. 

visual loss
Macular dystrophy associated with mutations at codon 172 in the human retinal degeneration slow gene.
BACKGROUND  Recently, mutations in the retinal degeneration slow (rds) gene which codes for peripherin-rds have been implicated as a cause of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Because this gene is expressed in both rods and cones, mutations in the rds gene might be expected to cause degeneration affecting either the scotopic or photopic systems. Mutations at codon 172 of the rds gene have been identified in three families with autosomal dominantly inherited, progressive macular dystrophy. METHODS  Affected individuals underwent ophthalmic examination, scotopic perimetry, dark adaptometry, measurement of color-contrast sensitivity, and electroretinography to characterize the photoreceptor dysfunction. RESULTS  In all but one affected member, symptoms of progressive central visual loss developed in the third or fourth decade of life accompanied by central scotoma and well-demarcated atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium and choriocapillaris of the macula. In general, cone and rod thresholds were elevated, and color-contrast sensitivity was absent in the central visual field. Peripherally, the scotopic sensitivities were normal, as was the recovery from bleach. Cone electroretinograms were diminished in amplitude, and delayed in all affected adults except one. Rod electroretinograms were normal or near normal in amplitude, and had normal implicit times. Affected asymptomatic children had macular changes, abnormal color-contrast sensitivity, and reduced pattern and cone electroretinograms. CONCLUSION  These results indicate that mutations in the rds gene can be expressed as a macular dystrophy, with evidence of primary cone dysfunction and preservation of peripheral rod function.. 

visual loss