Haploinsufficiency of the transcription factors FOXC1 and FOXC2 results in aberrant ocular development.
Anterior segment developmental disorders, including Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly (ARA), variably associate with harmfully elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), which causes glaucoma. Clinically observed dysgenesis does not correlate with IOP, however, and the etiology of glaucoma development is not understood. The forkhead transcription factor genes Foxc1 (formerly Mf1) and Foxc2 (formerly Mfh1) are expressed in the mesenchyme from which the ocular drainage structures derive. Mutations in the human homolog of Foxc1, FKHL7, cause dominant anterior segment defects and glaucoma in various families. We show that Foxc1 (+/-) mice have anterior segment abnormalities similar to those reported in human patients. These abnormalities include small or absent Schlemms canal, aberrantly developed trabecular meshwork, iris hypoplasia, severely eccentric pupils and displaced Schwalbes line. The penetrance of clinically obvious abnormalities varies with genetic background. In some affected eyes, collagen bundles were half normal diameter, or collagen and elastic tissue were very sparse. Thus, abnormalities in extracellular matrix synthesis or organization may contribute to development of the ocular phenotypes. Despite the abnormalities in ocular drainage structures in Foxc1 (+/-) mice, IOP was normal in almost all mice analyzed, on all genetic backgrounds and at all ages. Similar abnormalities were found in Foxc2 (+/-) mice, but no disease-associated mutations were identified in the human homolog FKHL14 in 32 ARA patients. Foxc1 (+/-) and Foxc2 (+/-) mice are useful models for studying anterior segment development and its anomalies, and may allow identification of genes that interact with Foxc1 and Foxc2 (or FKHL7 and FKHL14) to produce a phenotype with elevated IOP and glaucoma.. 

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly
ARA
ARA
Missense mutation in the alternative splice region of the PAX6 gene in eye anomalies.
The PAX6 gene is involved in ocular morphogenesis, and PAX6 mutations have been detected in various types of ocular anomalies, including aniridia, Peters anomaly, corneal dystrophy, congenital cataract, and foveal hypoplasia. The gene encodes a transcriptional regulator that recognizes target genes through its paired-type DNA-binding domain. The paired domain is composed of two distinct DNA-binding subdomains, the N-terminal subdomain (NTS) and the C-terminal subdomain (CTS), which bind respective consensus DNA sequences. The human PAX6 gene produces two alternative splice isoforms that have the distinct structure of the paired domain. The insertion, into the NTS, of 14 additional amino acids encoded by exon 5a abolishes the DNA-binding activity of the NTS and unmasks the DNA-binding ability of the CTS. Thus, exon 5a appears to function as a molecular switch that specifies target genes. We ascertained a novel missense mutation in four pedigrees with Peters anomaly, congenital cataract, Axenfeldt anomaly, and/or foveal hypoplasia, which, to our knowledge, is the first mutation identified in the splice-variant region. A T-- > A transition at the 20th nucleotide position of exon 5a results in a Val-- > Asp (GTC-- > GAC) substitution at the 7th codon of the alternative splice region. Functional analyses demonstrated that the V54D mutation slightly increased NTS binding and decreased CTS transactivation activity to almost half.. 

Axenfeldt anomaly