Glycerol as a correlate of impaired glucose tolerance: dissection of a complex system by use of a simple genetic trait.
Glycerol kinase (GK) represents the primary entry of glycerol into glucose and triglyceride metabolism. Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and hypertriglyceridemia are associated with an increased risk of diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. The relationship between glycerol and the risk of IGT, however, is poorly understood. We therefore undertook the study of fasting plasma glycerol levels in a cohort of 1, 056 unrelated men and women of French-Canadian descent. Family screening in the initial cohort identified 18 men from five families with severe hyperglycerolemia (values above 2. 0 mmol/liter) and demonstrated an X-linked pattern of inheritance. Linkage analysis of the data from 12 microsatellite markers surrounding the Xp21. 3 GK gene resulted in a peak LOD score of 3. 46, centered around marker DXS8039. In addition, since all of the families originated in a population with a proven founder effect-the Saguenay Lac-St. -Jean region of Quebec-a common disease haplotype was sought. Indeed, a six-marker haplotype extending over a region of 5. 5 cM was observed in all families. Resequencing of the GK gene in family members led to the discovery of a N288D missense mutation in exon 10, which resulted in the substitution of a highly conserved asparagine residue by a negatively charged aspartic acid. 

hyperglycerolemia
Complex glycerol kinase deficiency: molecular-genetic, cytogenetic, and clinical studies of five Japanese patients.
Five male Japanese patients with complex glycerol kinase deficiency (CGKD) and their relatives were studied clinically, cytogenetically, and molecular-genetically. All patients had muscular dystrophy or muscle weakness, mental retardation, congenital adrenal hypoplasia, and glycerol kinase deficiency. High-resolution GTG-banded chromosomes showed a microdeletion in the Xp21 region in all four patients examined and in all five mothers. Southern hybridizations, after digestions by restriction endonucleases, with various cloned DNAs (D2, 99-6, B24, C7, L1-4, cDMD13-14, J66-HI, P20, J-Bir, ERT87-30, ERT87-15, ERT87-8, ERT87-1, XJ-1. 1, 754, cx5. 7, and OTC-1) that are located around Xp21 also showed a deletion in the genome of all patients and mothers. Although the deletion differed in size among patients, a segment commonly absent was located between the genomic sequences corresponding to L1-4 and cDMD13-14. This finding indicated that the gene coding for glycerol kinase (GK) is located within this segment. A comparison of the clinical manifestations of the present five patients and reported CGKD or Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients with DNA deletion suggests the existence of a certain gene responsible for gonadotropin deficiency (GTD). The result of the present study and results of previous studies suggest that genes for ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), DMD, and GK and putative genes responsible for congenital adrenal hypoplasia (AHC) and GTD are arranged from telomere to centromere as pter--GTD--AHC--GK--DMD--OTC--cen 

Complex glycerol kinase deficiency
complex glycerol kinase deficiency
CGKD
glycerol kinase deficiency
CGKD