Mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
BACKGROUND  X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an inherited disease characterized by progressive neurologic dysfunction, occasionally associated with adrenal insufficiency. The classic form of ALD usually has onset in childhood (childhood cerebral ALD), with rapid neurologic deterioration leading to a vegetative state. Adult-onset cerebral ALD also presents with rapidly progressive neurologic dysfunction. Milder phenotypes such as adrenomyeloneuropathy and Addison disease only also have been recognized. Despite discovery of the causative gene, a molecular basis for the diverse clinical presentations remains to be elucidated. OBJECTIVES  To conduct mutational analyses in 29 Japanese patients with ALD from 29 unrelated families, to obtain knowledge of the spectrum of mutations in this gene, and to study genotype-phenotype correlations in Japanese patients. METHODS  The 29 patients comprised 13 patients with childhood cerebral ALD, 11 patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD, and 5 patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy. We conducted detailed mutational analyses of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with ALD by genomic Southern blot analysis and direct nucleotide sequence analysis of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction products derived from total RNA that was extracted from cultured skin fibroblasts, lymphoblastoid cells, or peripheral blood leukocytes. RESULTS  Three patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD were identified as having large genomic rearrangements. The remaining 26 patients were identified as having 21 independent mutations, including 12 novel mutations resulting in small nucleotide alterations in the ALD gene. Eighteen (69%) of 26 mutations were missense mutations. Most missense mutations involved amino acids conserved in homologous gene products, including PMP70, mALDRP, and Pxa1p. The AG dinucleotide deletion at position 1081-1082, which has been reported previously to be the most common mutation in white patients (12% -17%), was also identified as the most common mutation in Japanese patients (12%). All phenotypes were associated with mutations resulting in protein truncation or subtle amino acid changes. There were no differences in phenotypic expressions between missense mutations involving conserved amino acids and those involving nonconserved amino acids. CONCLUSIONS  There are no obvious correlations between the phenotypes of patients with ALD and their genotypes, suggesting that other genetic or environmental factors modify the phenotypic expressions of ALD.. 

Addison disease
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD): a novel mutation of the ALD gene in 6 members of a family presenting with 5 different phenotypes.
Fragments of the adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) cDNA from a patient with adolescent ALD were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and subcloned. Bidirectional sequencing of the entire coding ALD gene disclosed a cytosine to guanine transversion at nucleotide 1451 in exon five, resulting in substitution of proline 484 by arginine. Five of nine siblings of the patient, comprising two cerebral ALD, one adrenomyeloneuropathy, one Addison only as well as the symptomatic mother (all accumulating very long chain fatty acids) carried this mutation, which was not found in the unaffected persons, in five unrelated ALD patients, and in twenty controls. We propose that this missense mutation generated the disease per se as well as the metabolic defect; the different phenotypes, however, must have originated by means of additional pathogenetic factors.. 

Addison only
Putative X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy gene shares unexpected homology with ABC transporters.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked disease affecting 1/20, 000 males either as cerebral ALD in childhood or as adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) in adults. Childhood ALD is the more severe form, with onset of neurological symptoms between 5-12 years of age. Central nervous system demyelination progresses rapidly and death occurs within a few years. AMN is a milder form of the disease with onset at 15-30 years of age and a more progressive course. Adrenal insufficiency (Addisons disease) may remain the only clinical manifestation of ALD. The principal biochemical abnormality of ALD is the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) because of impaired beta-oxidation in peroxisomes. The normal oxidation of VLCFA-CoA in patients fibroblasts suggested that the gene coding for the VLCFA-CoA synthetase could be a candidate gene for ALD. Here we use positional cloning to identify a gene partially deleted in 6 of 85 independent patients with ALD. In familial cases, the deletions segregated with the disease. An identical deletion was detected in two brothers presenting with different clinical ALD phenotypes. Candidate exons were identified by computer analysis of genomic sequences and used to isolate complementary DNAs by exon connection and screening of cDNA libraries. The deduced protein sequence shows significant sequence identity to a peroxisomal membrane protein of M (r) 70K that is involved in peroxisome biogenesis and belongs to the ATP-binding cassette superfamily of transporters.. 

Addisons disease
Phenotype heterogeneity among hemizygotes in a family biochemically screened for adrenoleukodystrophy.
We report on two clinically, neurologically normal relatives of a boy affected by adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD); they were found repeatedly to have the biochemical defect of an ALD hemizygote. The assay consisted in the determination of very-long-chain fatty acids in lyophilized and reconstituted plasma. While no evidence of neurologic disease (leukodystrophy or myeloneuropathy) was present in these hemizygotes, adrenocortical insufficiency provoking compensatory high ACTH release was found in both. These findings should be taken into consideration when counseling families in which cases with clinically expressed ALD are represented in several generations.. 

adrenocortical insufficiency
Adrenoleukodystrophy and adrenomyeloneuropathy associated with partial adrenal insufficiency in three generations of a kindred.
Four cases of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) and one case of adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) have developed in a kindred over three generations demonstrating that AMN is a clinical variant of ALD. Pituitary-adrenal function studies were performed in 10 family members, including two affected males and four females identified as carriers of ALD/AMN. No pituitary-adrenal abnormality was found in the carriers. However, basal morning plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels were markedly elevated in the two males with ALD and AMN, despite the fact that they had no clinical signs of adrenal insufficiency and that morning plasma cortisol levels and their response to maximal exogenous ACTH stimulation appeared to be normal. In addition, the integrated 24-hour response to the administration were also subnormal in these two cases. Thus, people with ALD and AMN may have subclinical partial adrenocrotical insufficiency. No other endocrinologic dysfunction was identified.. 

adrenocrotical insufficiency
Mutations in the gene for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy in patients with different clinical phenotypes.
Recently, the gene for the most common peroxisomal disorder, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), has been described encoding a peroxisomal membrane transporter protein. We analyzed the entire protein-coding sequence of this gene by reverse-transcription PCR, SSCP, and DNA sequencing in five patients with different clinical expression of X-ALD and in their female relatives; these clinical expressions were cerebral childhood ALD, adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), and " Addison disease only " (ADO) phenotype. In the three patients exhibiting the classical picture of severe childhood ALD we identified in the 5 portion of the X-ALD gene a 38-bp deletion that causes a frameshift mutation, a 3-bp deletion leading to a deletion of an amino acid in the ATP-binding domain of the ALD protein, and a missense mutation. In the patient with the clinical phenotype of AMN, a nonsense mutation in codon 212, along with a second site mutation at codon 178, was observed. Analysis of the patient with the ADO phenotype revealed a further missense mutation at a highly conserved position in the ALDP/PMP70 comparison. The disruptive nature of two mutations (i. e., the frameshift and the nonsense mutation) in patients with biochemically proved childhood ALD and AMN further strongly supports the hypothesis that alterations in this gene play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of X-ALD. Since the current biochemical techniques for X-ALD carrier detection in affected families lack sufficient reliability, our procedure described for systematic mutation scanning is also capable of improving genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis 

Addison disease only
ADO
ADO