Homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia: a disease distinct from abetalipoproproteinemia at the molecular level.
apoB DNA, RNA, and protein from two patients with homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia (HBL) were evaluated and compared with normal individuals. Southern blot analysis with 10 different cDNA probes revealed a normal gene without major insertions, deletions, or rearrangements. Northern and slot blot analyses of total liver mRNA from HBL patients documented a normal size apoB mRNA that was present in greatly reduced quantities. ApoB protein was detected within HBL hepatocytes utilizing immunohistochemical techniques; however, it was markedly reduced in quantity when compared with control samples. No apoB was detectable in the plasma of HBL individuals with an ELISA assay. These data are most consistent with a mutation in the coding portion of the apoB gene in HBL patients, leading to an abnormal apoB protein and apoB mRNA instability. These results are distinct from those previously noted in abetalipoproteinemia, which was characterized by an elevated level of hepatic apoB mRNA and accumulation of intracellular hepatic apoB protein.. 

abetalipoproproteinemia
abetalipoproteinemia
Molecular and metabolic basis for the metabolic disorder normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia.
We have previously described a disorder, normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia, that is characterized by the virtual absence of plasma low density lipoproteins and complete absence of apoB-100, but with apparently normal secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins containing apoB-48. The patients plasma lipoproteins were shown on polyacrylamide gels and by antibody mapping to have a new truncated apoB variant, apoB-50, circulating along with her apoB-48. We have found this individual to be homozygous for a single C-to-T nucleotide substitution at apoB codon 2252, which produces a premature in-frame stop codon. Thus, this is a rare example of homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia. Electron photomicrographs revealed that the diameters of particles in the d less than 1. 006 g/ml lipoprotein fraction, in both the postprandial and postabsorptive state, are bimodally distributed. The molar ratio of apoE to apoB in these particles is 3. 5  1, similar to normal VLDL. The plasma LDL interval contains both spherical and cuboidal particles. Autologous reinfusion of labeled d less than 1. 006 g/ml lipoproteins showed exponential disappearance from plasma, with an apparent half-removal time of 50 min, somewhat slower than for normal chylomicrons but within the normal range for VLDL. The calculated production rate for apoB was within the normal range in this subject. 

normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia
normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia
Genetic analysis of a Japanese family with normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia indicates a lack of linkage to the apolipoprotein B gene.
Normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia is a rare familial disorder characterized by an isolated deficiency of apoB-100. We have previously reported a patient with this disease, who had normal apoB-48 but no apoB-100. To elucidate the genetic abnormalities in this family, we studied the linkage of apoB gene using three genetic markers. The proband and her affected brother showed completely different apoB gene alleles, suggesting that the apoB gene itself is not related to this disorder in this family. By contrast, an American case had a point substitution in the apoB gene generating an in-frame stop codon. These results indicate that this disorder can be caused by defect (s) of either an apoB gene or other genes.. 

normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia
Normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia
A novel frameshift mutation in the McLeod syndrome gene in a Japanese family.
We report a novel mutation in the XK gene (XK) in a Japanese patient with McLeod syndrome. A 50-year-old man showed progressive muscular atrophy, choreic movement, elevated level of serum creatinine kinase, and acanthocytosis. The expression level of all the Kell antigens in erythrocyte was decreased and molecular analysis revealed a single-base (T) deletion at the nucleotide position 1095 in XK. This deletion caused a frameshift in translation, leading to a premature stop codon at the amino acid position 408. We conclude this single-base deletion causes defective Kx protein, which is responsible for the McLeod phenotype in this patient.. 

acanthocytosis