Mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
BACKGROUND  X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an inherited disease characterized by progressive neurologic dysfunction, occasionally associated with adrenal insufficiency. The classic form of ALD usually has onset in childhood (childhood cerebral ALD), with rapid neurologic deterioration leading to a vegetative state. Adult-onset cerebral ALD also presents with rapidly progressive neurologic dysfunction. Milder phenotypes such as adrenomyeloneuropathy and Addison disease only also have been recognized. Despite discovery of the causative gene, a molecular basis for the diverse clinical presentations remains to be elucidated. OBJECTIVES  To conduct mutational analyses in 29 Japanese patients with ALD from 29 unrelated families, to obtain knowledge of the spectrum of mutations in this gene, and to study genotype-phenotype correlations in Japanese patients. METHODS  The 29 patients comprised 13 patients with childhood cerebral ALD, 11 patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD, and 5 patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy. We conducted detailed mutational analyses of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with ALD by genomic Southern blot analysis and direct nucleotide sequence analysis of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction products derived from total RNA that was extracted from cultured skin fibroblasts, lymphoblastoid cells, or peripheral blood leukocytes. RESULTS  Three patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD were identified as having large genomic rearrangements. The remaining 26 patients were identified as having 21 independent mutations, including 12 novel mutations resulting in small nucleotide alterations in the ALD gene. Eighteen (69%) of 26 mutations were missense mutations. Most missense mutations involved amino acids conserved in homologous gene products, including PMP70, mALDRP, and Pxa1p. The AG dinucleotide deletion at position 1081-1082, which has been reported previously to be the most common mutation in white patients (12% -17%), was also identified as the most common mutation in Japanese patients (12%). All phenotypes were associated with mutations resulting in protein truncation or subtle amino acid changes. There were no differences in phenotypic expressions between missense mutations involving conserved amino acids and those involving nonconserved amino acids. CONCLUSIONS  There are no obvious correlations between the phenotypes of patients with ALD and their genotypes, suggesting that other genetic or environmental factors modify the phenotypic expressions of ALD.. 

adrenal insufficiency
Adrenoleukodystrophy: survey of 303 cases: biochemistry, diagnosis, and therapy.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a genetically determined disorder associated with progressive central demyelination and adrenal cortical insufficiency. All affected persons show increased levels of saturated unbranched very-long-chain fatty acids, particularly hexacosanoate (C26  0), because of impaired capacity to degrade these acids. This degradation normally takes place in a subcellular organelle called the peroxisome, and ALD, together with Zellwegers cerebrohepatorenal syndrome, is now considered to belong to the newly formed category of peroxisomal disorders. Biochemical assays permit prenatal diagnosis, as well as identification of most heterozygotes. We have identified 303 patients with ALD in 217 kindreds. These patients show a wide phenotypic variation. Sixty percent of patients had childhood ALD and 17% adrenomyeloneuropathy, both of which are X-linked, with the gene mapped to Xq28. Neonatal ALD, a distinct entity with autosomal recessive inheritance and points of resemblance to Zellwegers syndrome, accounted for 7% of the cases. Although excess C26  0 in the brain of patients with ALD is partially of dietary origin, dietary C26  0 restriction did not produce clear benefit. Bone marrow transplant lowered the plasma C26  0 level but failed to arrest neurological progression.. 

adrenal cortical insufficiency
Putative X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy gene shares unexpected homology with ABC transporters.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked disease affecting 1/20, 000 males either as cerebral ALD in childhood or as adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) in adults. Childhood ALD is the more severe form, with onset of neurological symptoms between 5-12 years of age. Central nervous system demyelination progresses rapidly and death occurs within a few years. AMN is a milder form of the disease with onset at 15-30 years of age and a more progressive course. Adrenal insufficiency (Addisons disease) may remain the only clinical manifestation of ALD. The principal biochemical abnormality of ALD is the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) because of impaired beta-oxidation in peroxisomes. The normal oxidation of VLCFA-CoA in patients fibroblasts suggested that the gene coding for the VLCFA-CoA synthetase could be a candidate gene for ALD. Here we use positional cloning to identify a gene partially deleted in 6 of 85 independent patients with ALD. In familial cases, the deletions segregated with the disease. An identical deletion was detected in two brothers presenting with different clinical ALD phenotypes. Candidate exons were identified by computer analysis of genomic sequences and used to isolate complementary DNAs by exon connection and screening of cDNA libraries. The deduced protein sequence shows significant sequence identity to a peroxisomal membrane protein of M (r) 70K that is involved in peroxisome biogenesis and belongs to the ATP-binding cassette superfamily of transporters.. 

Adrenal insufficiency
Adrenoleukodystrophy and adrenomyeloneuropathy associated with partial adrenal insufficiency in three generations of a kindred.
Four cases of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) and one case of adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) have developed in a kindred over three generations demonstrating that AMN is a clinical variant of ALD. Pituitary-adrenal function studies were performed in 10 family members, including two affected males and four females identified as carriers of ALD/AMN. No pituitary-adrenal abnormality was found in the carriers. However, basal morning plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels were markedly elevated in the two males with ALD and AMN, despite the fact that they had no clinical signs of adrenal insufficiency and that morning plasma cortisol levels and their response to maximal exogenous ACTH stimulation appeared to be normal. In addition, the integrated 24-hour response to the administration were also subnormal in these two cases. Thus, people with ALD and AMN may have subclinical partial adrenocrotical insufficiency. No other endocrinologic dysfunction was identified.. 

adrenal insufficiency
adrenal insufficiency