Adenomatous polyposis coli and a cytogenetic deletion of chromosome 5 resulting from a maternal intrachromosomal insertion.
We present the clinical and laboratory findings in an institutionalised adult patient originally referred for autism. A high risk of colorectal cancer was predicted when an interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5, del (5) (q15q22. 3), was detected in her lymphocytes and deletion of the MCC and APC genes confirmed by molecular analysis. Adenomatous polyposis coli and carcinoma of the rectum were subsequently diagnosed in the patient. She was profoundly mentally retarded, autistic, and had minor dysmorphic features consistent with those of previous patients with similar deletions. The deletion arose as a result of recombination within the small insertion loop formed at meiosis by the direct insertion (dir ins (5) (q22. 3q14. 2q15)) found in the patients mother. This family further confirms the cytogenetic mapping of both MCC and APC genes to 5q22 and comparison with other recent cases suggests that both genes and their closely linked markers lie within the 5q22. 1 subband 

dysmorphic features
Deletion of the KIT and PDGFRA genes in a patient with piebaldism.
We have previously shown that human piebaldism results from mutations of the KIT gene, which encodes the receptor for the mast/stem cell growth factor and is located in chromosome segment 4q12. Using DNA of a patient with piebaldism, mental retardation, and multiple congenital anomalies associated with a 46, XY, del (4) (q12q21. 1) karyotype, we carried out quantitative Southern blot hybridization analyses of the KIT gene and the adjacent PDGFRA (platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha subunit) genes. The patient was hemizygous for both the KIT and PDGFRA genes, indicating that both of these genes are included within the deleted region. Therefore, deletion of the KIT and PDGFRA genes may account for the piebald phenotype in this patient. 

multiple congenital anomalies
A common molecular basis for rearrangement disorders on chromosome 22q11.
The chromosome 22q11 region is susceptible to rearrangements that are associated with congenital anomaly disorders and malignant tumors. Three congenital anomaly disorders, cat-eye syndrome, der () syndrome and velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) are associated with tetrasomy, trisomy or monosomy, respectively, for part of chromosome 22q11. VCFS/DGS is the most common syndrome associated with 22q11 rearrangements. In order to determine whether there are particular regions on 22q11 that are prone to rearrangements, the deletion end-points in a large number of VCFS/DGS patients were defined by haplotype analysis. Most VCFS/DGS patients have a similar 3 Mb deletion, some have a nested distal deletion breakpoint resulting in a 1. 5 Mb deletion and a few rare patients have unique deletions or translocations. The high prevalence of the disorder in the population and the fact that most cases occur sporadically suggest that sequences at or near the breakpoints confer susceptibility to chromosome rearrangements. To investigate this hypothesis, we developed hamster-human somatic hybrid cell lines from VCFS/DGS patients with all three classes of deletions and we now show that the breakpoints occur within similar low copy repeats, termed LCR22s. To support this idea further, we identified a family that carries an interstitial duplication of the same 3 Mb region that is deleted in VCFS/DGS patients. We present models to explain how the LCR22s can mediate different homologous recombination events, thereby generating a number of rearrangements that are associated with congenital anomaly disorders. We identified five additional copies of the LCR22 on 22q11 that may mediate other rearrangements leading to disease. 

congenital anomaly disorders
congenital anomaly disorders
congenital anomaly disorders
Null mutation of the murine ATP7B (Wilson disease) gene results in intracellular copper accumulation and late-onset hepatic nodular transformation.
The Atp7b protein is a copper-transporting ATPase expressed predominantly in the liver and to a lesser extent in most other tissues. Mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to Wilson disease, a copper toxicity disorder characterized by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent hepatic and neuro-logical abnormalities. Using homologous recombination to disrupt the normal translation of ATP7B, we have generated a strain of mice that are homozygous mutants (null) for the Wilson disease gene. The ATP7B null mice display a gradual accumulation of hepatic copper that increases to a level 60-fold greater than normal by 5 months of age. An increase in copper concentration was also observed in the kidney, brain, placenta and lactating mammary glands of homo-zygous mutants, although milk from the mutant glands was copper deficient. Morphological abnormalities resembling cirrhosis developed in the majority of the livers from homozygous mutants older than 7 months of age. Progeny of the homozygous mutant females demonstrated neurological abnormalities and growth retardation characteristic of copper deficiency. Copper concentration in the livers of the newborn homozygous null mutants was decreased dramatically. In summary, inactivation of the murine ATP7B gene produces a form of cirrhotic liver disease that resembles Wilson disease in humans and the toxic milk phenotype in the mouse.. 

Morphological abnormalities
Maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 in a boy with a normal karyotype.
We report on a boy with a maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 (UPD (14)). At 7 years of age he was referred to us by the paediatrician because of symptoms of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). He showed short stature, obesity, mild developmental delay, cryptorchidism, and some mild dysmorphic features. The history further indicated intrauterine growth retardation at the end of the pregnancy. His mother was 44 years of age at the time of his birth. After birth he showed hypotonia with poor sucking, for which gavage feeding was needed. Motor development was delayed. After 1 year he became obese despite a normal appetite. Recurrent middle ear infections, a high pain threshold, and a great skill with jigsaw puzzles were reported. There were no behavioural problems or sleep disturbance. Chromosomal analysis was normal (46, XY). DNA analysis for Prader-Willi syndrome showed no abnormalities. Two years later he was re-examined because we thought his features fitted the PWS-like phenotype associated with maternal UPD (14). At that time precocious puberty was evident. DNA analysis showed maternal heterodisomy for chromosome 14. In all the previously described 11 cases with maternal UPD (14), a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14 was detected cytogenetically before DNA analysis. This is the first report of diagnosis of maternal UPD (14) based on clinical features. This finding underlines the importance of DNA analysis for maternal UPD (14) in patients with a similar PWS-like phenotype even without previous identification of a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14.. 

dysmorphic features