Linkage analysis in a large Brazilian family with van der Woude syndrome suggests the existence of a susceptibility locus for cleft palate at 17p11.2-11.1.
van der Woude syndrome (VWS), which has been mapped to 1q32-41, is characterized by pits and/or sinuses of the lower lip, cleft lip/palate (CL/P), cleft palate (CP), bifid uvula, and hypodontia (H). The expression of VWS, which has incomplete penetrance, is highly variable. Both the occurrence of CL/P and CP within the same genealogy and a recurrence risk < 40% for CP among descendants with VWS have suggested that the development of clefts in this syndrome is influenced by modifying genes at other loci. To test this hypothesis, we have conducted linkage analysis in a large Brazilian kindred with VWS, considering as affected the individuals with CP, regardless of whether it is associated with other clinical signs of VWS. Our results suggest that a gene at 17p11. 2-11 2-11. 1, together with the VWS gene at 1p32-41, enhances the probability of CP in an individual carrying the two at-risk genes. If this hypothesis is confirmed in other VWS pedigrees, it will represent one of the first examples of a gene, mapped through linkage analysis, which modifies the expression of a major gene. 

hypodontia
H
Confirmation of linkage of Van der Woude syndrome to chromosome 1q32: evidence of association with STR alleles suggests possible unique origin of the disease mutation.
Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) is an autosomal dominant craniofacial disorder with high penetrance and variable expression. Its clinical features are variably expressed, but include cleft lip and/or cleft palate, lip pits and hypodontia. All VWS families studied to date map the disease gene to a < 2 cM region of chromosome 1q32, with no evidence of locus heterogeneity. The aim of this study is to refine the localization of the VWS gene and to further assess possible heterogeneity. We analyzed four multiplex VWS families. All available members were clinically assessed and genotyped for 19 short tandem repeat markers on chromosome 1 in the VWS candidate gene region. We performed two-point and multipoint limit of detection (LOD) score analyses using a high penetrance autosomal dominant model. All families showed positive LOD scores without any recombination in the candidate region. The largest two-point LOD score was 5. 87 87. Our assay method for short tandem repeat (STR) markers provided highly accurate size estimation of marker allele fragment sizes, and therefore enabled us to determine the specific alleles segregating with the VWS gene in each of our four families. We observed a striking pattern of STR allele sharing at several closely linked loci among our four Caucasian VWS families recruited at three different locations in the US. These results suggest the possibility of a unique origin for a mutation responsible for many or most cases of VWS. 

hypodontia