Familial deficiency of the seventh component of complement associated with recurrent bacteremic infections due to Neisseria.
The serum of a 29-year old woman with a recent episode of disseminated gonococcal infection and a history of meningococcal meningitis and arthritis as a child was found to lack serum hemolytic complement activity. The seventh component of complement (C7) was not detected by functional or immunochemical assays, whereas other components were normal by hemolytic and immunochemical assessment. Her fresh serum lacked complement-mediated bactericidal activity against Neisseria gonorrhoeae, but the addition of fresh normal serum or purified C7 restored bactericidal activity as well as hemolytic activity. The absence of functional C7 activity could not be accounted for on the basis of an inhibitor. Opsonization and generation of chemotactic activity functioned normally. Complete absence of C7 was also found in one sibling who had the clinical syndrome of meningococcal meningitis and arthritis  as a child and in this siblings clinically well eight-year-old son. HLA histocompatibility typing of the family members did not demonstrate evidence for genetic linkage of C7 deficiency with the major histocompatibility loci. This report represents the first cases of C7 deficiency associated with infectious complications and suggests that bactericidal activity may be important in host defense against bacteremic neisseria infections.

arthritis
arthritis
Absence of the seventh component of complement in a patient with chronic meningococcemia presenting as vasculitis.
A previously healthy 40-year-old man presenting with fever, arthritis, and cutaneous vasculitis was found to have chronic meningococcemia. Evaluation of his complement system showed an absence of functional and antigenic C7, compatible with a complete deficiency of the seventh component of complement. Study of the patients family spanning four generations showed heterozygous deficiency of C7 in five members. Chronic neisserial infection can be associated with C7 deficiency and must be distinguished from other causes of cutaneous vasculitis.. 

arthritis
A population-based study of the clinical expression of the hemochromatosis gene.
BACKGROUND AND METHODS  Hereditary hemochromatosis is associated with homozygosity for the C282Y mutation in the hemochromatosis (HFE) gene on chromosome 6, elevated serum transferrin saturation, and excess iron deposits throughout the body. To assess the prevalence and clinical expression of the HFE gene, we conducted a population-based study in Busselton, Australia. In 1994, we obtained blood samples for the determination of serum transferrin saturation and ferritin levels and the presence or absence of the C282Y mutation and the H63D mutation (which may contribute to increased hepatic iron levels) in 3011 unrelated white adults. We evaluated all subjects who had persistently elevated transferrin-saturation values (45 percent or higher) or were homozygous for the C282Y mutation. We recommended liver biopsy for subjects with serum ferritin levels of 300 ng per milliliter or higher. The subjects were followed for up to four years. RESULTS  Sixteen of the subjects (0. 5 percent) were homozygous for the C282Y mutation, and 424 (14. 1 percent) were heterozygous. The serum transferrin saturation was 45 percent or higher in 15 of the 16 who were homozygous; in 1 subject it was 43 percent. Four of the homozygous subjects had previously been given a diagnosis of hemochromatosis, and 12 had not. Seven of these 12 patients had elevated serum ferritin levels in 1994; 6 of the 7 had further increases in 1998, and 1 had a decrease, although the value remained elevated. The serum ferritin levels in the four other homozygous patients remained in the normal range. Eleven of the 16 homozygous subjects underwent liver biopsy; 3 had hepatic fibrosis, and 1, who had a history of excessive alcohol consumption, had cirrhosis and mild microvesicular steatosis. Eight of the 16 homozygous subjects had clinical findings that were consistent with the presence of hereditary hemochromatosis, such as hepatomegaly, skin pigmentation, and arthritis. CONCLUSIONS  In a population of white adults of northern European ancestry, 0. 5 percent were homozygous for the C282Y mutation in the HFE gene. However, only half of those who were homozygous had clinical features of hemochromatosis, and one quarter had serum ferritin levels that remained normal over a four-year period.

arthritis
MEFV-Gene analysis in armenian patients with Familial Mediterranean fever: diagnostic value and unfavorable renal prognosis of the M694V homozygous genotype-genetic and therapeutic implications.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessively inherited disorder that is common in patients of Armenian ancestry. To date, its diagnosis, which can be made only retrospectively, is one of exclusion, based entirely on nonspecific clinical signs that result from serosal inflammation and that may lead to unnecessary surgery. Renal amyloidosis, prevented by colchicine, is the most severe complication of FMF, a disorder associated with mutations in the MEFV gene. To evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic value of MEFV-gene analysis, we investigated 90 Armenian FMF patients from 77 unrelated families that were not selected through genetic-linkage analysis. Eight mutations, one of which (R408Q) is new, were found to account for 93% of the 163 independent FMF alleles, with both FMF alleles identified in 89% of the patients. In several instances, family studies provided molecular evidence for pseudodominant transmission and incomplete penetrance of the disease phenotype. The M694V homozygous genotype was found to be associated with a higher prevalence of renal amyloidosis and arthritis, compared with other genotypes (P =. 0002 and P =. 006, respectively). The demonstration of both the diagnostic and prognostic value of MEFV analysis and particular modes of inheritance should lead to new ways for management of FMF-including genetic counseling and therapeutic decisions in affected families.

arthritis
Family studies in Bechterew's syndrome (ankylosing spondylitis) III. Genetics.
The results of segregation analyses in 75 families where the proband had ankylosing spondylitis, are presented. Of the 278 adult, living first degree relatives, approximately 85% cooperated in the study. Clinical and radiographical examinations were performed and HLA typing was conducted. The results were in agreement with our hypothesis that ankylosing spondylitis is part of a syndrome where different genetic factors interact. Such known factors are HLA B27 associated disease susceptibility, susceptibility to psoriatic arthropathy and susceptibility to entero-arthropathy. Radiographical sacro-iliitis was restricted to HLA B27 positive relatives, and was more frequently found in relatives to probands with psoriasis than in relatives to probands without psoriasis. Environmental factors (intestinal bacteria) are known to trigger the disease at least in some persons, and we have postulated that all or most of them have the predisposition to develop disease. Thus, the syndrome has a multifactorial etiology. The phenotypic expressions of the different genetic predispositions involved, include sacro-iliitis, psoriasis, acute anterior uveitis, peripheral arthropathy and inflammatory bowel disease. We suggest the descriptive name HEREDITARY MULTIFOCAL RELAPSING INFLAMMATION (HEMRI) for this syndrome. Ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy and entero-arthropathy may be regarded as clinical sub-types of the syndrome.. 

entero-arthropathy
HLA B27 and the genetics of ankylosing spondylitis.
One hundred and twenty-eight of 145 patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) were found to be HLA B27 positive. Five patients had evidence of a sero-negative peripheral arthritis resembling peripheral psoriatic arthritis and 3 of these were B27 negative. One further B27 negative patients had a sister with ankylosing spondylitis and ulcerative colitis and a mother with ulcerative colitis. There was evidence of a somewhat later age of onset of symptoms in B27 negative patients. These findings are interpreted as suggesting some degree of clinical and genetic heterogeneity in ankylosing spondylitis with genes for psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease being important in some individuals, particularly those who are B27 negative. Twenty-five first-degree relatives with ankylosing spondylitis were all B27 positive. The only instance of disassociation of B27 and spondylitis in a family was where the proband had ulcerative colitis as well as spondylitis. Of 13 B27 positive fathers 3 could be diagnosed as having definite ankylosing spondylitis (23%). These findings are thought to provide evidence against the concept that the gene for ankylosing spondylitis is not B27 but a closely linked gene and favour the occurrence of an environmental event affecting approximately one-fifth of B27 positive males to result in disease.. 

peripheral arthritis
Late-onset familial Mediterranean fever (FMF): a subset with distinct clinical, demographic, and molecular genetic characteristics.
To determine the prevalence and characterize demographic, clinical, and genetic features of familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) of late onset, all patients experiencing their first FMF attack at age 40 years or more were identified using the computerized registry of our FMF clinic, and then thoroughly interviewed and examined. The control group consisted of 40 consecutive FMF patients, who arrived at the FMF clinic for their regular follow-up visit and were 40 years of age or older at the time of the examination. The severity of the disease in patients and controls was determined using a modified score, developed previously. Mutational analysis in the FMF gene was performed using a commercial kit. Only 20 of 4000 (0. 5%) patients had late-onset FMF. These patients were mostly men, of non-North African origin, P < 0. 05 compared to controls. All had abdominal attacks and in most these were the only manifestation of their disease, P < 0. 001 001. None had chronic or prolonged manifestations of FMF, for example, amyloidosis, chronic arthritis, or protracted myalgia, P < 0. 001. The response to treatment was good despite using low colchicine dose, P < 0. 05. The overall severity score indicated a mild disease, P < 0. 001. Mutational analysis revealed absence of M694V homozygosity, P < 0. 01, compared to our regular FMF population. We conclude that the onset of FMF in a late age defines a milder form of disease with typical clinical, demographic, and molecular genetic characteristics 

chronic arthritis