Characterization of the rat spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 gene.
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) belongs to a group of clinically and genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia. The disease-causing mutation has recently been identified as an unstable and expanded (CAG) n trinucleotide repeat in a novel gene of unknown function. In Caucasians, repeat expansions in the MJD1 gene have also been found in patients with the clinically distinct autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3). In order to gain insight into the biology of the MJD1/SCA3 gene we cloned the rat homologue and studied its expression. The rat and human ataxin-3 genes are highly homologous with an overall sequence identity of approximately 88%. However, the C-terminal end of the putative protein differs strongly from the published human sequence. The (CAG) n block in the rat cDNA consists of just three interrupted units suggesting that a long polyglutamine stretch is not essential for the normal function of the ataxin-3 protein in rodents. The expression pattern of the SCA3 gene in various rat and human tissues was investigated by Northern blot analyses. The mature transcript is approximately 6 kb in length. In rat testis, a smaller transcript of 1. 3 kb was identified. Transcription of rsca3 was detected in most rat tissues including brain. Analyzing the expression level of the SCA3 gene in several human brain sections revealed no significant higher mRNA level in regions predominantly affected in MJD. Thus additional molecules and/or regulatory events are necessary to explain the exclusive degeneration of certain brain areas. 

degeneration of certain brain areas
Brain disease and molecular analysis in myotonic dystrophy.
Abnormal amplification of a CTG repeat on chromosome 19 is the molecular basis of myotonic dystrophy (DM). Expansion of the repeat has been correlated with severity of several clinical features of the disease. We performed extensive cognitive testing, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a molecular analysis in 28 cases of DM to determine the relationship between the molecular defect and brain disease. Performance in two or more cognitive tests was pathological in 10 cases. Fourteen patients had subcortical white matter lesions on MRI, 14 had cerebral atrophy. Amplification of the CTG repeat showed a strong correlation with cognitive test deficits when exceeding a length of over 1000 trinucleotides. MRI lesions were associated with impaired psychometric performance, but MRI and molecular findings were only weakly related. Disease duration influenced the appearance and amount of white matter lesions on MRI. Quantification of CTG repeat size may allow an early estimate on the probability of brain involvement in DM; cognitive dysfunction is associated with white matter lesions and cerebral atrophy later on in the course.. 

Brain disease
brain disease