ATM-dependent phosphorylation of nibrin in response to radiation exposure.
Mutations in the gene ATM are responsible for the genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is characterized by cerebellar dysfunction, radiosensitivity, chromosomal instability and cancer predisposition. Both the A-T phenotype and the similarity of the ATM protein to other DNA-damage sensors suggests a role for ATM in biochemical pathways involved in the recognition, signalling and repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). There are strong parallels between the pattern of radiosensitivity, chromosomal instability and cancer predisposition in A-T patients and that in patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS). The protein defective in NBS, nibrin (encoded by NBS1), forms a complex with MRE11 and RAD50 (refs 1, 2). This complex localizes to DSBs within 30 minutes after cellular exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) and is observed in brightly staining nuclear foci after a longer period of time. The overlap between clinical and cellular phenotypes in A-T and NBS suggests that ATM and nibrin may function in the same biochemical pathway. Here we demonstrate that nibrin is phosphorylated within one hour of treatment of cells with IR. This response is abrogated in A-T cells that either do not express ATM protein or express near full-length mutant protein. We also show that ATM physically interacts with and phosphorylates nibrin on serine 343 both in vivo and in vitro. Phosphorylation of this site appears to be functionally important because mutated nibrin (S343A) does not completely complement radiosensitivity in NBS cells. ATM phosphorylation of nibrin does not affect nibrin-MRE11-RAD50 association as revealed by radiation-induced foci formation. Our data provide a biochemical explanation for the similarity in phenotype between A-T and NBS.. 

cerebellar dysfunction
Abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes in Atm mutant mice.
Motor incoordination, immune deficiencies, and an increased risk of cancer are the characteristic features of the hereditary disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Through gene targeting, we have generated a line of Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice. In contrast to other Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice show a lower incidence of thymic lymphoma and survive beyond a few months of age. Atm (y/y) mice exhibit deficits in motor learning indicative of cerebellar dysfunction. Even though we found no gross cerebellar degeneration in older Atm (y/y) animals, ectopic and abnormally differentiated Purkinje cells were apparent in mutant mice of all ages. These findings establish that some neuropathological abnormalities seen in A-T patients also are present in Atm mutant mice. In addition, we report a previously unrecognized effect of Atm deficiency on development or maintenance of CD4 (+) 8 (+) thymocytes. We discuss these findings in the context of the hypothesis that abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes contributes to the pathogenesis of A-T.. 

cerebellar dysfunction