Malignant neoplasms in the families of patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive syndrome associated with a greatly increased incidence of malignant neoplasms in homozygous affected individuals. Heterozygotes for the gene for A-T are thought to comprise about 1% of the general population and, therefore, it is important to know whether this gene also predisposes the heterozygous carrier to cancers. Heterozygous carriers of this gene are common among the close relatives of patients with A-T, although individual carriers cannot be identified by any clinical criterion or laboratory test. For this reason, we compared the incidence of death from malignant neoplasms in 2 families of patients with A-T to that expected in a random sample of the general population. There were 59 deaths from malignant neoplasms in relatives dying before age 75, compared to 42. 6 expected (p less than 0. 02). For A-T heterozygotes younger than age 45, the risk of dying from a malignant neoplasm was estimated to be greater than 5 times the risk for the general population. A-T heterozygotes may comprise more than 5% of all persons dying from a cancer before age 45. The incidence of ovarian, gastric, and biliary system carcinomas and of leukemia and lymphoma was increased in these A-T families. Other neoplasms that may be associated with this gene in heterozygotes include pancreatic, basal cell, colonic, breast, and cervical carcinomas.

pancreatic, basal cell, colonic, breast, and cervical carcinomas
Increased incidence of cancer in patients with cartilage-hair hypoplasia.
OBJECTIVE  Previous reports have suggested an increased risk of cancer among patients with cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH). This study was carried out to further evaluate this risk among patients with CHH and their first-degree relatives. STUDY DESIGN  One hundred twenty-two patients with CHH were identified through 2 countrywide epidemiologic surveys in 1974 and in 1986. Their parents and nonaffected siblings were identified through the Population Register Center. This cohort underwent follow-up for cancer incidence through the Finnish Cancer Registry to the end of 1995. RESULTS  A statistically significant excess risk of cancer was seen among the patients with CHH (standardized incidence ratio 6. 9, 95% confidence interval 2. 3 to 16), which was mainly attributable to non-Hodgkins lymphoma  (standardized incidence ratio 90, 95% confidence interval 18 to 264). In addition, a significant excess risk of basal cell carcinoma was seen (standardized incidence ratio 35, 95% confidence interval 7. 2 to 102). The cancer incidence among the siblings or the parents did not differ from the average cancer incidence in the Finnish population. CONCLUSIONS  This study confirms an increased risk of cancer, especially non-Hodgkins lymphoma, probably attributable to defective immunity, among patients with CHH.

basal cell carcinoma