Expression and imprinting of MAGEL2 suggest a role in Prader-willi syndrome and the homologous murine imprinting phenotype.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is caused by the loss of expression of imprinted genes in chromosome 15q11-q13. Affected individuals exhibit neonatal hypotonia, developmental delay and childhood-onset obesity. Necdin, a protein implicated in the terminal differentiation of neurons, is the only PWS candidate gene to reduce viability when disrupted in a mouse model. In this study, we have characterized MAGEL2 (also known as NDNL1), a gene with 51% amino acid sequence similarity to necdin and located 41 kb distal to NDN in the PWS deletion region. MAGEL2 is expressed predominantly in brain, the primary tissue affected in PWS and in several fetal tissues as shown by northern blot analysis. MAGEL2 is imprinted with monoallelic expression in control brain, and paternal-only expression in the central nervous system as demonstrated by its lack of expression in brain from a PWS-affected individual. The orthologous mouse gene (Magel2) is located within 150 kb of NDN , is imprinted with paternal-only expression and is expressed predominantly in late developmental stages and adult brain as shown by northern blotting, RT-PCR and whole-mount RNA in situ hybridization. Magel2 distribution partially overlaps that of NDN , with strong expression being detected in the central nervous system in mid-gestation mouse embryos by in situ hybridization. We hypothesize that, although loss of necdin expression may be important in the neonatal presentation of PWS, loss of MAGEL2 may be critical to abnormalities in brain development and dysmorphic features in individuals with PWS.. 

developmental delay
abnormalities in brain development
Maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 in a boy with a normal karyotype.
We report on a boy with a maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 (UPD (14)). At 7 years of age he was referred to us by the paediatrician because of symptoms of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). He showed short stature, obesity, mild developmental delay, cryptorchidism, and some mild dysmorphic features. The history further indicated intrauterine growth retardation at the end of the pregnancy. His mother was 44 years of age at the time of his birth. After birth he showed hypotonia with poor sucking, for which gavage feeding was needed. Motor development was delayed. After 1 year he became obese despite a normal appetite. Recurrent middle ear infections, a high pain threshold, and a great skill with jigsaw puzzles were reported. There were no behavioural problems or sleep disturbance. Chromosomal analysis was normal (46, XY). DNA analysis for Prader-Willi syndrome showed no abnormalities. Two years later he was re-examined because we thought his features fitted the PWS-like phenotype associated with maternal UPD (14). At that time precocious puberty was evident. DNA analysis showed maternal heterodisomy for chromosome 14. In all the previously described 11 cases with maternal UPD (14), a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14 was detected cytogenetically before DNA analysis. This is the first report of diagnosis of maternal UPD (14) based on clinical features. This finding underlines the importance of DNA analysis for maternal UPD (14) in patients with a similar PWS-like phenotype even without previous identification of a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14.. 

developmental delay
Craniofrontonasal dysplasia.
We report on nine patients with craniofrontonasal dysplasia (CFND). Seven classical cases had facial features suggestive of frontonasal dysplasia and coronal craniosynostosis. Extracranial abnormalities such as brittle nails with prominent longitudinal grooves or syndactyly of fingers and toes were observed in individual patients. In two families the father of classical cases showed a milder pattern of abnormalities, consistent with the diagnosis. We present a 2- to 13-year follow-up on our patients. Hypotonia and laxity of joints are common and may necessitate supportive measures. Mild developmental delay was noted in three out of six classical cases studied in detail. Unlike almost all other X-linked disorders, clinical expression in CFND is generally much more severe in females than in males. In contrast to previous reports of this condition, one of our severely affected cases is a male.. 

developmental delay
Germline intronic and exonic mutations in the Wilms' tumour gene (WT1) affecting urogenital development.
Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare human developmental disorder affecting the urogenital system and leading to renal failure, intersex disorders and Wilms tumour. In this report, four individuals with this syndrome are described carrying germline point mutations in the Wilms tumour suppressor gene, WT1. Three of these mutations were in the zinc finger domains of WT1. The fourth occurred within intron 9, preventing splicing at one of the alternatively chosen splice donor sites of exon 9 when assayed in vitro. These results provide genetic evidence for distinct functional roles of the WT1 isoforms in urogenital development.. 

developmental disorder