Prader-Willi syndrome and chromosome 15. A clinical discussion of 20 cases.
A chromosome 15 anomaly was observed in 12 of 20 patients, 17 of whom were clinically suspected of having Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). The clinical features of eight cases with 15q11-12 deletion were very similar to those originally described in PWS. On the other hand, the group of normal karyotype patients is heterogeneous, and their features do not strictly correspond to the clinical definition of PWS. However, the hypothesis that PWS is associated with deletion of 15q11-12 can neither explain the apparently balanced translocations of chromosome 15 nor account for the small supernumerary metacentric chromosomes corresponding to an isochromosome 15 for band 15q11 observed in some cases.. 

chromosome 15 anomaly
A common molecular basis for rearrangement disorders on chromosome 22q11.
The chromosome 22q11 region is susceptible to rearrangements that are associated with congenital anomaly disorders and malignant tumors. Three congenital anomaly disorders, cat-eye syndrome, der () syndrome and velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) are associated with tetrasomy, trisomy or monosomy, respectively, for part of chromosome 22q11. VCFS/DGS is the most common syndrome associated with 22q11 rearrangements. In order to determine whether there are particular regions on 22q11 that are prone to rearrangements, the deletion end-points in a large number of VCFS/DGS patients were defined by haplotype analysis. Most VCFS/DGS patients have a similar 3 Mb deletion, some have a nested distal deletion breakpoint resulting in a 1. 5 Mb deletion and a few rare patients have unique deletions or translocations. The high prevalence of the disorder in the population and the fact that most cases occur sporadically suggest that sequences at or near the breakpoints confer susceptibility to chromosome rearrangements. To investigate this hypothesis, we developed hamster-human somatic hybrid cell lines from VCFS/DGS patients with all three classes of deletions and we now show that the breakpoints occur within similar low copy repeats, termed LCR22s. To support this idea further, we identified a family that carries an interstitial duplication of the same 3 Mb region that is deleted in VCFS/DGS patients. We present models to explain how the LCR22s can mediate different homologous recombination events, thereby generating a number of rearrangements that are associated with congenital anomaly disorders. We identified five additional copies of the LCR22 on 22q11 that may mediate other rearrangements leading to disease. 

rearrangement disorders
Centrosome amplification and a defective G2-M cell cycle checkpoint induce genetic instability in BRCA1 exon 11 isoform-deficient cells.
Germline mutations of the Brca1 tumor suppressor gene predispose women to breast and ovarian cancers. To study mechanisms underlying BRCA1-related tumorigenesis, we derived mouse embryonic fibroblast cells carrying a targeted deletion of exon 11 of the Brca1 gene. We show that the mutant cells maintain an intact G1-S cell cycle checkpoint and proliferate poorly. However, a defective G2-M checkpoint in these cells is accompanied by extensive chromosomal abnormalities. Mutant fibroblasts contain multiple, functional centrosomes, which lead to unequal chromosome segregation, abnormal nuclear division, and aneuploidy. These data uncover an essential role of BRCA1 in maintaining genetic stability through the regulation of centrosome duplication and the G2-M checkpoint and provide a molecular basis for the role of BRCA1 in tumorigenesis.. 

chromosomal abnormalities
Hereditary C2 deficiency associated with common variable immunodeficiency.
Homozygous C2 deficiency in a 19-year-old boy was associated with variable immunodeficiency manifested by marked hypoimmunoglobulinemia and impaired antibody responses, normal circulating B lymphocytes, and subnormal T-cell functions. Neither antilymphocytic autoantibodies nor chromosomal abnormalities were found. Serum immunoglobulin levels were within normal limits in his parents and brother who were heterozygous for C2 deficiency. The patients lymphocytes were homozygous at the HLA-D locus but expressed an antigen different from DW2.. 

chromosomal abnormalities
Isolation of molecular probes associated with the chromosome 15 instability in the Prader-Willi syndrome.
Flow cytometry and recombinant DNA techniques have been used to obtain reagents for a molecular analysis of the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). HindIII total-digest libraries were prepared in lambda phage Charon 21A from flow-sorted inverted duplicated no. 15 human chromosomes and propagated on recombination-proficient (LE392) and recBC-, sbcB- (DB1257) bacteria. Twelve distinct chromosome 15-specific probes have been isolated. Eight localized to the region 15q11----13. Four of these eight sublocalized to band 15q11. 2 and are shown to be deleted in DNA of one of two patients examined with the PWS. Heteroduplex analysis of two of these clones, which grew on DB1257 but not on LE392, revealed stem-loop structures in the inserts, indicative of inverted, repeated DNA elements. Such DNA repeats might account for some of the cloning instability of DNA segments from proximal 15q. Analysis of the genetic and physical instability associated with the repeated sequences we have isolated from band 15q11. 2 may elucidate the molecular basis for the instability of this chromosomal region in patients with the PWS or other diseases associated with chromosomal abnormalities in the proximal long arm of human chromosome 15 

chromosomal abnormalities