Adrenoleukodystrophy: survey of 303 cases: biochemistry, diagnosis, and therapy.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a genetically determined disorder associated with progressive central demyelination and adrenal cortical insufficiency. All affected persons show increased levels of saturated unbranched very-long-chain fatty acids, particularly hexacosanoate (C26  0), because of impaired capacity to degrade these acids. This degradation normally takes place in a subcellular organelle called the peroxisome, and ALD, together with Zellwegers cerebrohepatorenal syndrome, is now considered to belong to the newly formed category of peroxisomal disorders. Biochemical assays permit prenatal diagnosis, as well as identification of most heterozygotes. We have identified 303 patients with ALD in 217 kindreds. These patients show a wide phenotypic variation. Sixty percent of patients had childhood ALD and 17% adrenomyeloneuropathy, both of which are X-linked, with the gene mapped to Xq28. Neonatal ALD, a distinct entity with autosomal recessive inheritance and points of resemblance to Zellwegers syndrome, accounted for 7% of the cases. Although excess C26  0 in the brain of patients with ALD is partially of dietary origin, dietary C26  0 restriction did not produce clear benefit. Bone marrow transplant lowered the plasma C26  0 level but failed to arrest neurological progression.. 

progressive central demyelination
Uncoupling of hypomyelination and glial cell death by a mutation in the proteolipid protein gene.
Proteolipid protein (PLP; M (r) 30, 000) is a highly conserved major polytopic membrane protein in myelin but its cellular function remains obscure. Neurological mutant mice can often provide model systems for human genetic disorders . Mutations of the X-chromosome-linked PLP gene are lethal, identified first in the jimpy mouse and subsequently in patients with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. The unexplained phenotype of these mutations includes degeneration and premature cell death of oligodendrocytes with associated hypomyelination. Here we show that a new mouse mutant rumpshaker is defined by the amino-acid substitution Ile-to-Thr at residue 186 in a membrane-embedded domain of PLP. Surprisingly, rumpshaker mice, although myelin-deficient, have normal longevity and a full complement of morphologically normal oligodendrocytes. Hypomyelination can thus be genetically separated from the PLP-dependent oligodendrocyte degeneration. We suggest that PLP has a vital function in glial cell development, distinct from its later role in myelin assembly, and that this dichotomy of action may explain the clinical spectrum of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.. 

hypomyelination
hypomyelination
myelin-deficient
Hypomyelination
Putative X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy gene shares unexpected homology with ABC transporters.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked disease affecting 1/20, 000 males either as cerebral ALD in childhood or as adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) in adults. Childhood ALD is the more severe form, with onset of neurological symptoms between 5-12 years of age. Central nervous system demyelination progresses rapidly and death occurs within a few years. AMN is a milder form of the disease with onset at 15-30 years of age and a more progressive course. Adrenal insufficiency (Addisons disease) may remain the only clinical manifestation of ALD. The principal biochemical abnormality of ALD is the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) because of impaired beta-oxidation in peroxisomes. The normal oxidation of VLCFA-CoA in patients fibroblasts suggested that the gene coding for the VLCFA-CoA synthetase could be a candidate gene for ALD. Here we use positional cloning to identify a gene partially deleted in 6 of 85 independent patients with ALD. In familial cases, the deletions segregated with the disease. An identical deletion was detected in two brothers presenting with different clinical ALD phenotypes. Candidate exons were identified by computer analysis of genomic sequences and used to isolate complementary DNAs by exon connection and screening of cDNA libraries. The deduced protein sequence shows significant sequence identity to a peroxisomal membrane protein of M (r) 70K that is involved in peroxisome biogenesis and belongs to the ATP-binding cassette superfamily of transporters.. 

Central nervous system demyelination
Predominance of the adrenomyeloneuropathy phenotype of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy in The Netherlands: a survey of 30 kindreds.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is an inherited disorder of peroxisomal beta-oxidation associated with accumulation of saturated very long-chain fatty acids, which results in central and peripheral demyelination and in impaired function of adrenal cortex and testes. The phenotypic expression is highly variable, childhood cerebral ALD (CCALD) and adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) being the main variants. We explored the 30 Dutch kindreds well known to the Dutch X-ALD/AMN Study Group and phenotyped 77 male patients  35 (46%) had AMN and 24 (31%) CCALD or adolescent cerebral ALD (AdolCALD). These percentages differ significantly from previous reports, in which 25 to 28% of the patients developed AMN and 53 to 57% CCALD or AdolCALD. Our findings indicate that--at least in the Netherlands--AMN may be the most frequent phenotype of X-ALD.. 

demyelination
Identification of mutations in the ALD-gene of 20 families with adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), an X-linked inherited metabolic disorder, is the most frequent inborn peroxisomal disease. It leads to demyelination in the central and peripheral nervous system. Defective beta-oxidation of saturated very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs; C22  0-C26  0) in peroxisomes has been shown to lead to an accumulation of VLCFAs in leukoid areas of the central nervous system, peripheral nerves, adrenal gland, and blood. The ALD gene has been recently identified and encodes a 745-amino-acid protein. We screened patients with adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy (ALD/AMN) from 20 kindreds for mutations in the ALD gene. Eleven missense and two nonsense mutations, five deletions, and one insertion were detected by direct sequencing of eight reverse transcribed fragments of the ALD-gene mRNA. Four mutations could be shown to be de novo. All mutations could be confirmed in carriers by sequencing genomic DNA. No correlation between the type of mutation and the severity of the phenotype could be observed. The mutations were not detected in the ALD gene of 30 healthy persons.. 

demyelination in the central and peripheral nervous system
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: an X-linked neurologic disorder of myelin metabolism with a novel mutation in the gene encoding proteolipid protein.
The nosology of the inborn errors of myelin metabolism has been stymied by the lack of molecular genetic analysis. Historically, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease has encompassed a host of neurologic disorders that present with a deficit of myelin, the membrane elaborated by glial cells that encircles and successively enwraps axons. We describe here a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher pedigree of the classical type, with X-linked inheritance, a typical clinical progression, and a pathologic loss of myelinating cells and myelin in the central nervous system. To discriminate variants of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a set of oligonucleotide primers was constructed to polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) amplify and sequence the gene encoding proteolipid protein (PLP), a structural protein that comprises half of the protein of the myelin sheath. The PLP gene in one of two affected males and the carrier mother of this family exhibited a single base difference in the more than 2 kb of the PLP gene sequenced, a C----T transition that would create a serine substitution for proline at the carboxy end of the protein. Our results delineate the clinical features of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, define the possible molecular pathology of this dysmyelinating disorder, and address the molecular classification of inborn errors of myelin metabolism. Patients with the classical form (type I) and the more severely affected, connatal variant of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (type II) would be predicted to display mutation at the PLP locus. The other variants (types III-VI), which have sometimes been categorized as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, may represent mutations in genes encoding other structural myelin proteins or proteins critical to myelination.. 

deficit of myelin
dysmyelinating disorder