Glucose/galactose malabsorption caused by a defect in the Na+/glucose cotransporter.
Glucose/galactose malabsorption (GGM) is an autosomal recessive disease manifesting within the first weeks of life and characterized by a selective failure to absorb dietary glucose and galactose from the intestine. The consequent severe diarrhoea and dehydration are usually fatal unless these sugars are eliminated from the diet. Intestinal biopsies of GGM patients have revealed a specific defect in Na (+) -dependent absorption of glucose in the brush border. Normal glucose absorption is mediated by the Na +/glucose cotransporter in the brush border membrane of the intestinal epithelium. Cellular influx is driven by the transmembrane Na + electrochemical potential gradient; thereafter the sugar moves to the blood across the basolateral membrane via the facilitated glucose carrier. We have previously cloned and sequenced a Na +/glucose cotransporter from normal human ileum and shown that this gene, SGLT1, resides on the distal q arm of chromosome 22. We have now amplified SGLT1 complementary DNA and genomic DNA from members of a family affected with GGM by the polymerase chain reaction. Sequence analysis of the amplified products has revealed a single missense mutation in SGLT1 which cosegregates with the GGM phenotype and results in a complete loss of Na (+) -dependent glucose transport in Xenopus oocytes injected with this complementary RNA.. 

diarrhoea
Structure of the human Na+/glucose cotransporter gene SGLT1.
Intestinal uptake of dietary glucose and galactose is mediated by the SGLT1 Na +/glucose cotransporter of the brush border. An SGLT1 missense mutation underlies hereditary glucose/galactose malabsorption, characterized by potentially fatal diarrhea; conversely, oral rehydration therapy exploits normal transport to alleviate life-threatening diarrhea of infectious origin. We have mapped the entire human SGLT1 Na +/glucose cotransporter gene from cosmid and lambda phage clones representing a genomic region of 112 kilobases. Transcription initiation occurred from a site 27 base pairs 3 of a TATAA sequence. All exon-flanking regions were sequenced, and the entire 112-kilobase region mapped with four restriction enzymes. SGLT1 is comprised of 15 exons (spanning 72 kilobases); a possible evolutionary origin from a six-membrane-span ancestral precursor via a gene duplication event is suggested from comparison of exons against protein secondary structure and from sequence considerations. A new missense mutation in exon 1 causing glucose/galactose malabsorption is also described. This is the first Na (+) -dependent cotransporter gene structure reported. These data facilitate the search for new glucose/galactose malabsorption-related mutations in this important gene and provide a basis for future evolutionary comparisons with other Na (+) -dependent cotransporters.. 

diarrhea
diarrhea