Changes at P183 of emerin weaken its protein-protein interactions resulting in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy characterized by early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and spine, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and cardiomyopathy associated with cardiac conduction defects. The emerin gene has been mapped to Xq28 and encodes a 34-kDa serine-rich protein, emerin, which has been localized to the nuclear envelope in a wide variety of tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mutations spanning the emerin gene have been identified in patients with EDMD. We present here the effect, on emerin protein expression, of two missense mutations identified in unrelated EDMD patients. These alterations predict the replacement of a proline residue at position 183 with either a histidine or a threonine. Biochemical analysis has demonstrated that the mobility and expression levels of the mutant forms of emerin are indistinguishable from that of wild-type emerin, but that they have weakened interactions with nuclear lamina components. In comparison with the usual EDMD phenotype, patients with P183 missense mutations have a later age at onset of first symptoms, elbow contractures, ankle contractures, upper limb weakness and lower limb weakness, but there is no difference for the age at onset of cardiac involvement. This is the first report of protein studies on patients with missense mutations resulting in the clinical features of EDMD. These studies demonstrate the importance of proline 183 for the proper structure/function of emerin.. 

contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and spine
elbow contractures
ankle contractures
Early onset of X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy in a boy with emerin gene deletion.
A boy developed contractures of the Achilles tendons at 3 years and of the postcervical muscles at 7 years, although neither contractures of the elbows nor cardiac abnormality were recognized by the age of 9 years. Muscle computed tomography scanning revealed changes characteristic of muscle involvement. Emerin was not detected in the biopsied muscle, and RT-PCR and PCR-based genomic DNA analyses of the emerin gene demonstrated no amplification product in the patient. These results confirmed the diagnosis of X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), and reinforce the necessity of molecular genetic diagnosis of the membrane protein emerin in younger patients with possible EDMD before appearance of the typical symptoms, to avoid sudden cardiac death.. 

contractures of the Achilles tendons
contractures of the elbows
Genotype-phenotype analysis in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and identification of a missense mutation associated with a milder phenotype.
Direct sequencing of the emerin gene in 22 families with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EMD) revealed mutations in 21 (95%), confirming that emerin mutations can be identified in the majority of families with X-linked EMD. Most emerin mutations result in absence of the protein. In this study three mutations (a missense mutation Pro183Thr and two in-frame deletions removing residues 95-99 and 236-241, respectively) were unusual in being associated with expression of mutant protein. The phenotype in these families was compared in detail with the clinical features in cases with typical null mutations. For the in-frame deletions there were no significant differences. In the family with the missense mutation the phenotype was milder. Age at onset was later for first symptoms and for development of ankle contractures and muscle weakness. These findings have diagnostic implications as well as pointing to functionally important regions of the emerin protein.. 

ankle contractures
Emerin, deficiency of which causes Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, is localized at the inner nuclear membrane.
X-linked recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an inherited muscle disorder characterized by the clinical triad of progressive wasting of humero-peroneal muscles, early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and postcervical muscles, and cardiac conduction block with a high risk of sudden death. The gene for EDMD on Xq28 encodes a novel protein named emerin that localizes at the nuclear membrane of skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscles and some other non-muscle tissues. To investigate a possible physiological role for emerin, we examined the ultrastructural localization of the protein in human skeletal muscle and HeLa cells, using ultrathin cryosections. We found that the immune-labeled colloidal gold particles were localized on the nucleoplasmic surface of the inner nuclear membrane, but not on the nuclear pore. Emerin stayed on the cytoplasmic surface of the nuclear lamina, even after detergent treatment that solubilizes membrane lipids and washes out membrane proteins. These results suggest that emerin anchors at the inner nuclear membrane through the hydrophobic stretch, and protrudes from the hydrophilic region to the nucleoplasm where it interacts with the nuclear lamina. We speculate that emerin contributes to maintain the nuclear structure and stability, as well as nuclear functions, particularly in muscle tissues that have severe stress with rigorous contraction-relaxation movements and calcium flux.. 

contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and postcervical muscles