Linkage analysis in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and application in post- and prenatal diagnosis.
We have performed linkage analysis with the DNA markers DXS52 and the clotting factor VIII gene (F8C), in several large families with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). The tight linkage to DXS52 could be extended giving a maximal LOD score of 22. 5 at 1 cM. F8C was also tightly linked to ALD with a maximal LOD score of 7. 8 without recombination. Multipoint linkage analysis with the markers DXS304, DXS52, and F8C indicated that both the gene for ALD and for F8C are distal to DXS52. In four patients with ALD, no major structural rearrangement in the Xqter region was observed; in particular, there were no abnormalities in the vision blindness genes. DNA analysis appeared to be of use in determination of the carrier status of females at risk, for the determination of the origin of the mutation in a particular family, and for prenatal diagnosis.

abnormalities in the vision blindness genes
Color vision defects in adrenomyeloneuropathy.
The relationship between abnormal color vision and adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) was investigated in 27 AMN patients and 31 age-matched controls by using the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 Hue test. Twelve (44%) of 27 patients showed test scores significantly above normal. The axes of bipolarity determined by the testing differed widely between the patients with abnormal scores, compatible with the notion that different alterations in visual pigment genes occur in different AMN kindreds. These observations confirm our earlier impression that the frequency of abnormal color vision is increased in these kindreds, and it supports our contentions that (1) AMN (and its companion, adrenoleukodystrophy) are very closely linked to the visual pigment loci at Xq28 and (2) this proximity might provide the opportunity to observe contiguous gene defects.. 

Color vision defects
abnormal color vision
abnormal color vision
The red-green visual pigment gene region in adrenoleukodystrophy.
Although recent data established that a specific very-long-chain fatty acyl-CoA synthetase is defective in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), the ALD gene is still unidentified. The ALD locus has been mapped to Xq28, like the red and green color pigment genes. Abnormal color vision has been observed in 12 of 27 patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), a milder form of ALD. Furthermore, rearrangements of the color vision gene cluster were found in four of eight ALD kindreds. This led us to propose that a single DNA rearrangement could underlie both ALD and abnormal color vision in these patients. Study of 34 French ALD patients failed to reveal a higher than expected frequency of green/red visual pigment rearrangements 3 to the red/green color vision gene complex. The previous report of such rearrangements was based on small numbers and lack of knowledge that the frequency of " abnormal " color vision arrays on molecular analysis was twice as high as expected on the basis of the frequency of phenotypic color vision defects. The red/green color pigment (R/GCP) region was studied by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis in 14 of these patients, and we did not find any fragment size difference between the patients and normal individuals who have the same number of pigment genes. The R/GCP region was also analyzed in 29 French and seven North American ALD patients by using six genomic DNA probes, isolated from a cosmid walk, that flank the color vision genes. No deletions were found with probes that lie 3 of the green pigment genes. One of the eight previously reported ALD individuals has a long deletion 5 of the red pigment gene, a deletion causing blue cone monochromacy. This finding and the previous findings of a 45% frequency of phenotypic color vision defects in patients with AMN may suggest that the ALD/AMN gene lies 5 to the red pigment gene and that the frequent phenotypic color vision anomalies owe their origin to deleted DNA that includes regulatory genes for color vision. It is possible, however, that phenotypic color vision anomalies in AMN may be phenocopies secondary to retinal or neural involvement by the disease. The single case of blue cone monochromacy may therefore be a fortuitous coincidence of two diseases.. 

Abnormal color vision
abnormal color vision
phenotypic color vision defects
color vision anomalies
color vision anomalies