Clinical and molecular genetic analysis of 19 Wolfram syndrome kindreds demonstrating a wide spectrum of mutations in WFS1.
Wolfram syndrome is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus and progressive optic atrophy. mtDNA deletions have been described, and a gene (WFS1) recently has been identified, on chromosome 4p16, encoding a predicted 890 amino acid transmembrane protein. Direct DNA sequencing was done to screen the entire coding region of the WFS1 gene in 30 patients from 19 British kindreds with Wolfram syndrome. DNA was also screened for structural rearrangements (deletions and duplications) and point mutations in mtDNA. No pathogenic mtDNA mutations were found in our cohort. We identified 24 mutations in the WFS1 gene  8 nonsense mutations, 8 missense mutations, 3 in-frame deletions, 1 in-frame insertion, and 4 frameshift mutations. Of these, 23 were novel mutations, and most occurred in exon 8. The majority of patients were compound heterozygotes for two mutations, and there was no common founder mutation. The data were also analyzed for genotype-phenotype relationships. Although some interesting cases were noted, consideration of the small sample size and frequency of each mutation indicated no clear-cut correlations between any of the observed mutations and disease severity. There were no obvious mutation hot spots or clusters. Hence, molecular screening for Wolfram syndrome in affected families and for Wolfram syndrome-carrier status in subjects with psychiatric disorders or diabetes mellitus will require complete analysis of exon 8 and upstream exons.. 

diabetes mellitus
Glycerol as a correlate of impaired glucose tolerance: dissection of a complex system by use of a simple genetic trait.
Glycerol kinase (GK) represents the primary entry of glycerol into glucose and triglyceride metabolism. Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and hypertriglyceridemia are associated with an increased risk of diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. The relationship between glycerol and the risk of IGT, however, is poorly understood. We therefore undertook the study of fasting plasma glycerol levels in a cohort of 1, 056 unrelated men and women of French-Canadian descent. Family screening in the initial cohort identified 18 men from five families with severe hyperglycerolemia (values above 2. 0 mmol/liter) and demonstrated an X-linked pattern of inheritance. Linkage analysis of the data from 12 microsatellite markers surrounding the Xp21. 3 GK gene resulted in a peak LOD score of 3. 46, centered around marker DXS8039. In addition, since all of the families originated in a population with a proven founder effect-the Saguenay Lac-St. -Jean region of Quebec-a common disease haplotype was sought. Indeed, a six-marker haplotype extending over a region of 5. 5 cM was observed in all families. Resequencing of the GK gene in family members led to the discovery of a N288D missense mutation in exon 10, which resulted in the substitution of a highly conserved asparagine residue by a negatively charged aspartic acid. 

diabetes mellitus
Clinical and genetic study of Friedreich ataxia in an Australian population.
Friedreich ataxia is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the FRDA gene that encodes a 210-amino acid protein called frataxin. An expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat in intron 1 of the gene is present in more than 95% of mutant alleles. Of the 83 people we studied who have mutations in FRDA, 78 are homozygous for an expanded GAA repeat; the other five patients have an expansion in one allele and a point mutation in the other. Here we present a detailed clinical and genetic study of a subset of 51 patients homozygous for an expansion of the GAA repeat. We found a correlation between the size of the smaller of the two expanded alleles and age at onset, age into wheelchair, scoliosis, impaired vibration sense, and the presence of foot deformity. There was no significant correlation between the size of the smaller allele and cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, loss of proprioception, or bladder symptoms. The larger allele size correlated with bladder symptoms and the presence of foot deformity. The duration of disease is correlated with wheelchair use and the presence of diabetes, scoliosis, bladder symptoms and impaired proprioception, and vibration sense but no other complications studied.. 

diabetes mellitus
diabetes