Genotype and phenotype in patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disease characterised by thymine-uraciluria in homozygous deficient patients and has been associated with a variable clinical phenotype. In order to understand the genetic and phenotypic basis for DPD deficiency, we have reviewed 17 families presenting 22 patients with complete deficiency of DPD. In this group of patients, 7 different mutations have been identified, including 2 deletions [295-298delTCAT, 1897delC], 1 splice-site mutation [IVS14 + 1G > A)] and 4 missense mutations (85T > C, 703C > T, 2658G > A, 2983G > T). Analysis of the prevalence of the various mutations among DPD patients has shown that the G-- > A point mutation in the invariant splice donor site is by far the most common (52%), whereas the other six mutations are less frequently observed. A large phenotypic variability has been observed, with convulsive disorders, motor retardation and mental retardation being the most abundant manifestations. A clear correlation between the genotype and phenotype has not been established. An altered beta-alanine, uracil and thymine homeostasis might underlie the various clinical abnormalities encountered in patients with DPD deficiency.

convulsive disorders
Study of the voltage-gated sodium channel beta 1 subunit gene (SCN1B) in the benign familial infantile convulsions syndrome (BFIC).
Benign familial infantile convulsions (BFIC) is a rare autosomal dominant epilepsy syndrome. This syndrome has been recently described in Italian and French pedigrees. Patients present with partial, then generalized seizures, with onset at age three months. The seizures usually spontaneously cease after one year without treatment, leaving no neurological abnormalities. We have mapped BFIC to chromosome 19q in five Italian pedigrees. The sodium channel beta1 subunit gene (SCN1B) maps to this candidate region and has been shown to be involved in one Australian pedigree with generalized epilepsy and febrile seizures " plus " (GEFS +). In this family, a missense mutation in SCN1B cosegregates with the GEFS + phenotype. BFIC and GEFS + have clinical features in common, therefore SCN1B is a candidate gene for BFIC. We studied SCN1B exons 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, using four SSCP methods in 10 Caucasian BFIC probands of Western Europe. We found no exon variants. One variant was identified in intron 5 (IVS5-10C > G), which did not segregate with BFIC and was observed in 9. 2% controls. A second variant in intron 5 was identified (IVS5 + 30G > A). It was rare, as not observed in controls, but not segregating with the BFIC phenotype. 

generalized epilepsy and febrile seizures   plus