A zinc finger truncation of murine WT1 results in the characteristic urogenital abnormalities of Denys-Drash syndrome .
The Wilms tumor -suppressor gene, WT1, plays a key role in urogenital development, and WT1 dysfunction is implicated in both neoplastic (Wilms tumor, mesothelioma, leukemias, and breast cancer) and nonneoplastic (glomerulosclerosis) disease. The analysis of diseases linked specifically with WT1 mutations, such as Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), can provide valuable insight concerning the role of WT1 in development and disease. DDS is a rare childhood disease characterized by a nephropathy involving mesangial sclerosis, XY pseudohermaphroditism, and/or Wilms tumor (WT). DDS patients are constitutionally heterozygous for exonic point mutations in WT1, which include mutations predicted to truncate the protein within the C-terminal zinc finger (ZF) region. We report that heterozygosity for a targeted murine Wt1 allele, Wt1 (tmT396), which truncates ZF3 at codon 396, induces mesangial sclerosis characteristic of DDS in adult heterozygous and chimeric mice. Male genital defects also were evident and there was a single case of Wilms tumor in which the transcript of the nontargeted allele showed an exon 9 skipping event, implying a causal link between Wt1 dysfunction and Wilms tumorigenesis in mice. However, the mutant WT1 (tmT396) protein accounted for only 5% of WT1 in both heterozygous embryonic stem cells and the WT. This has implications regarding the mechanism by which the mutant allele exerts its effect.

nonneoplastic
Uncoupling of hypomyelination and glial cell death by a mutation in the proteolipid protein gene.
Proteolipid protein (PLP; M (r) 30, 000) is a highly conserved major polytopic membrane protein in myelin but its cellular function remains obscure. Neurological mutant mice can often provide model systems for human genetic disorders . Mutations of the X-chromosome-linked PLP gene are lethal, identified first in the jimpy mouse and subsequently in patients with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. The unexplained phenotype of these mutations includes degeneration and premature cell death of oligodendrocytes with associated hypomyelination. Here we show that a new mouse mutant rumpshaker is defined by the amino-acid substitution Ile-to-Thr at residue 186 in a membrane-embedded domain of PLP. Surprisingly, rumpshaker mice, although myelin-deficient, have normal longevity and a full complement of morphologically normal oligodendrocytes. Hypomyelination can thus be genetically separated from the PLP-dependent oligodendrocyte degeneration. We suggest that PLP has a vital function in glial cell development, distinct from its later role in myelin assembly, and that this dichotomy of action may explain the clinical spectrum of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.. 

glial cell death
Iron-dependent self-assembly of recombinant yeast frataxin: implications for Friedreich ataxia.
Frataxin deficiency is the primary cause of Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), an autosomal recessive cardiodegenerative and neurodegenerative disease. Frataxin is a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein that is widely conserved among eukaryotes. Genetic inactivation of the yeast frataxin homologue (Yfh1p) results in mitochondrial iron accumulation and hypersensitivity to oxidative stress. Increased iron deposition and evidence of oxidative damage have also been observed in cardiac tissue and cultured fibroblasts from patients with FRDA. These findings indicate that frataxin is essential for mitochondrial iron homeostasis and protection from iron-induced formation of free radicals. The functional mechanism of frataxin, however, is still unknown. We have expressed the mature form of Yfh1p (mYfh1p) in Escherichia coli and have analyzed its function in vitro. Isolated mYfh1p is a soluble monomer (13, 783 Da) that contains no iron and shows no significant tendency to self-associate. Aerobic addition of ferrous iron to mYfh1p results in assembly of regular spherical multimers with a molecular mass of approximately 1. 1 MDa (megadaltons) and a diameter of 13 +/-2 nm. Each multimer consists of approximately 60 subunits and can sequester > 3, 000 atoms of iron. Titration of mYfh1p with increasing iron concentrations supports a stepwise mechanism of multimer assembly. Sequential addition of an iron chelator and a reducing agent results in quantitative iron release with concomitant disassembly of the multimer, indicating that mYfh1p sequesters iron in an available form. In yeast mitochondria, native mYfh1p exists as monomer and a higher-order species with a molecular weight > 600, 000. After addition of (55) Fe to the medium, immunoprecipitates of this species contain > 16 atoms of (55) Fe per molecule of mYfh1p. We propose that iron-dependent self-assembly of recombinant mYfh1p reflects a physiological role for frataxin in mitochondrial iron sequestration and bioavailability.. 

hypersensitivity to oxidative stress
The human factor IX gene as germline mutagen test: samples from Mainland China have the putatively endogenous pattern of mutation.
Germline mutations are the major source of genetic variation that allows a species to evolve over time but at the cost of Mendelian disease and genetic predisposition to multifactorial diseases. Previous analyses have revealed that the pattern of germline mutations in the factor IX gene (F9) is similar among a variety of ethnically and geographically diverse populations and compatible with the ancient pattern that has shaped the mammalian genome. Here, we compare the pattern of germline mutation in a population of hemophilia B patients from Mainland China (n = 66) to that in U. S. Caucasians, Blacks, and Mexican Hispanics and stratify by disease severity and ethnicity. The similar pattern of germline mutation in all ethnic groups studied to date provides additional data compatible with the inference that endogenous processes predominate in germline mutations. 

multifactorial diseases
Atm and Bax cooperate in ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis in the central nervous system.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a hereditary multisystemic disease resulting from mutations of ataxia telangiectasia, mutated (ATM) and is characterized by neurodegeneration, cancer, immune defects, and hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation. The molecular details of ATM function in the nervous system are unclear, although the neurological lesion in ataxia-telangiectasia becomes apparent early in life, suggesting a developmental origin. The central nervous system (CNS) of Atm-null mice shows a pronounced defect in apoptosis induced by genotoxic stress, suggesting ATM functions to eliminate neurons with excessive genomic damage. Here, we report that the death effector Bax is required for a large proportion of Atm-dependent apoptosis in the developing CNS after ionizing radiation (IR). Although many of the same regions of the CNS in both Bax-/- and Atm-/- mice were radioresistant, mice nullizygous for both Bax and Atm showed additional reduction in IR-induced apoptosis in the CNS. Therefore, although the major IR-induced apoptotic pathway in the CNS requires Atm and Bax, a p53-dependent collateral pathway exists that has both Atm- and Bax-independent branches. Further, Atm- and Bax-dependent apoptosis in the CNS also required caspase-3 activation. These data implicate Bax and caspase-3 as death effectors in neurodegenerative pathways.. 

hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation
ATM phosphorylates p95/nbs1 in an S-phase checkpoint pathway.
The rare diseases ataxia-telangiectasia (AT), caused by mutations in the ATM gene, and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), with mutations in the p95/nbs1 gene, share a variety of phenotypic abnormalities such as chromosomal instability, radiation sensitivity and defects in cell-cycle checkpoints in response to ionizing radiation. The ATM gene encodes a protein kinase that is activated by ionizing radiation or radiomimetic drugs, whereas p95/nbs1 is part of a protein complex that is involved in responses to DNA double-strand breaks. Here, because of the similarities between AT and NBS, we evaluated the functional interactions between ATM and p95/nbs1. Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and induction of ATM-dependent responses in NBS cells indicated that p95/nbs1 may not be required for signalling to ATM after ionizing radiation. However, p95/nbs1 was phosphorylated on serine 343 in an ATM-dependent manner in vitro and in vivo after ionizing radiation. A p95/nbs1 construct mutated at the ATM phosphorylation site abrogated an S-phase checkpoint induced by ionizing radiation in normal cells and failed to compensate for this functional deficiency in NBS cells. These observations link ATM and p95/nbs1 in a common signalling pathway and provide an explanation for phenotypic similarities in these two diseases.. 

phenotypic abnormalities
Functional link between ataxia-telangiectasia and Nijmegen breakage syndrome gene products.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) are recessive genetic disorders with susceptibility to cancer and similar cellular phenotypes. The protein product of the gene responsible for A-T, designated ATM, is a member of a family of kinases characterized by a carboxy-terminal phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like domain. The NBS1 protein is specifically mutated in patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome and forms a complex with the DNA repair proteins Rad50 and Mrel1. Here we show that phosphorylation of NBS1, induced by ionizing radiation, requires catalytically active ATM. Complexes containing ATM and NBS1 exist in vivo in both untreated cells and cells treated with ionizing radiation. We have identified two residues of NBS1, Ser 278 and Ser 343 that are phosphorylated in vitro by ATM and whose modification in vivo is essential for the cellular response to DNA damage. This response includes S-phase checkpoint activation, formation of the NBS1/Mrel1/Rad50 nuclear foci and rescue of hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation. Together, these results demonstrate a biochemical link between cell-cycle checkpoints activated by DNA damage and DNA repair in two genetic diseases with overlapping phenotypes.. 

hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation
The DNA double-strand break repair gene hMRE11 is mutated in individuals with an ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder.
We show that hypomorphic mutations in hMRE11, but not in ATM, are present in certain individuals with an ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD). The cellular features resulting from these hMRE11 mutations are similar to those seen in A-T as well as NBS and include hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation, radioresistant DNA synthesis, and abrogation of ATM-dependent events, such as the activation of Jun kinase following exposure to gamma irradiation. Although the mutant hMre11 proteins retain some ability to interact with hRad50 and Nbs1, formation of ionizing radiation-induced hMre11 and Nbs1 foci was absent in hMRE11 mutant cells. These data demonstrate that ATM and the hMre11/hRad50/Nbs1 protein complex act in the same DNA damage response pathway and link hMre11 to the complex pathology of A-T.. 

hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation
Myotonic dystrophy: evidence for a possible dominant-negative RNA mutation.
The trinucleotide expansion mutation causing myotonic dystrophy is in the 3 untranslated region of a protein kinase gene. The molecular mechanisms by which the expanded repeat causes the clinically variable and multisystemic disease, myotonic dystrophy, are not understood. It has been particularly difficult to rationalize the dominant inheritance with the fact that the expansion mutation lies outside of the protein-encoding gene elements, and should not be translated into protein. Here we use muscle biopsies from classical adult-onset myotonic dystrophy patients to study the accumulation of transcripts from both the normal and expanded DM kinase genes in patient muscle, and compare the results to normal and myopathic controls. We found relatively small decreases of DM kinase RNA in the total RNA pool from muscle; however, these reductions were not disease specific. Analysis of poly (A) + RNA showed dramatic decreases of both the mutant and normal DM kinase RNAs, and these changes were disease-specific. Our findings are consistent with a novel molecular pathogenetic mechanism for myotonic dystrophy  both the normal and expanded DM kinase genes are transcribed in patient muscle, but the abnormal expansion-containing RNA has a dominant effect on RNA metabolism by preventing the accumulation of poly (A) + RNA. The ability of the expansion mutation to alter accumulation of poly (A) + RNA in trans suggests that myotonic dystrophy may be the first example of a dominant-negative mutation manifested at the RNA level.. 

multisystemic disease