Mxi1 mutations in human neurofibrosarcomas.
Mxi1 is thought to negatively regulate Myc function and may therefore be a potential tumor suppressor gene. Little effort has yet been made to find alterations involving this gene in human solid tumors. We screened 31 human gastric cancers, 7 esophageal cancers, 85 bone and soft tissue tumors of various types, including 4 neurofibrosarcomas. We also examined 29 human tumor cell lines consisting of 12 esophageal cancers, 7 glioma/glioblastomas and 10 others for Mxi1 mutations in exons 1, 2, 4 (HLH domain), 5 and 6. Polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and subsequent sequencing revealed three distinct polymorphisms in the intron-exon boundary upstream from exon 6. We discovered a missense mutation, GCA to GTA (Ala 54 Val), in exon 2 in a neurofibrosarcoma patient (case 1), two missense mutations, AAA to CAA (Lys 118 Gln) and GAA to GGA (Glu 154 Gly) in exon 5 of another neurofibrosarcoma patient (case 2), and 3 amino acid substitutions, GTG to GCG (Val 179 Ala), GTT to GCT (Val 181 Ala) and TTC to CTC (Phe 186 Leu), in a third neurofibrosarcoma patient (case 3). In case 3, loss of heterozygosity was also demonstrated by informative (TTC) 3/(TTC) 2 polymorphism. Our data demonstrate that mutations occur in the Mxi1 gene in neurofibrosarcoma. Missense mutations in the functional domain of Mxi1 in these cases may be involved in the pathogenesis of neurofibrosarcoma.. 

glioma
Spectrum of hSNF5/INI1 somatic mutations in human cancer and genotype-phenotype correlations.
The hSNF5/INI1 gene which encodes a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin ATP-dependent remodeling complex, is a new tumor suppressor gene localized on chromosome 22q11. 2 and recently shown to be mutated in malignant rhabdoid tumors. We have searched for hSNF5/INI1 mutations in 229 tumors of various origins using a screening method based on denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography. A total of 31 homozygous deletions and 36 point alterations were identified. Point mutations were scattered along the coding sequence and included 15 nonsense, 15 frameshift, three splice site, two missense and one editing mutations. Mutations were retrieved in most rhabdoid tumors, whatever their sites of occurrence, indicating the common pathogenetic origin of these tumors. Recurrent hSNF5/INI1 alterations were also observed in choroid plexus carcinomas and in a subset of central primitive neuroectodermal tumors (cPNETs) and medulloblastomas. In contrast, hSNF5/INI1 point mutations were not detected in breast cancers, Wilms tumors, gliomas, ependymomas, sarcomas and other tumor types, even though most analyzed cases harbored loss of heterozygosity at 22q11. 2 loci. These results suggest that rhabdoid tumors, choroid plexus carcinomas and a subset of medulloblastomas and cPNETs share common pathways of oncogenesis related to hSNF5/INI1 alteration and that hSNF5/INI1 mutations define a genetically homogeneous family of highly aggressive cancers mainly occurring in young children and frequently, but not always, exhibiting a rhabdoid phenotype 

gliomas