A zinc finger truncation of murine WT1 results in the characteristic urogenital abnormalities of Denys-Drash syndrome .
The Wilms tumor -suppressor gene, WT1, plays a key role in urogenital development, and WT1 dysfunction is implicated in both neoplastic (Wilms tumor, mesothelioma, leukemias, and breast cancer) and nonneoplastic (glomerulosclerosis) disease. The analysis of diseases linked specifically with WT1 mutations, such as Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), can provide valuable insight concerning the role of WT1 in development and disease. DDS is a rare childhood disease characterized by a nephropathy involving mesangial sclerosis, XY pseudohermaphroditism, and/or Wilms tumor (WT). DDS patients are constitutionally heterozygous for exonic point mutations in WT1, which include mutations predicted to truncate the protein within the C-terminal zinc finger (ZF) region. We report that heterozygosity for a targeted murine Wt1 allele, Wt1 (tmT396), which truncates ZF3 at codon 396, induces mesangial sclerosis characteristic of DDS in adult heterozygous and chimeric mice. Male genital defects also were evident and there was a single case of Wilms tumor in which the transcript of the nontargeted allele showed an exon 9 skipping event, implying a causal link between Wt1 dysfunction and Wilms tumorigenesis in mice. However, the mutant WT1 (tmT396) protein accounted for only 5% of WT1 in both heterozygous embryonic stem cells and the WT. This has implications regarding the mechanism by which the mutant allele exerts its effect.

glomerulosclerosis
Inherited C3 deficiency with recurrent infections and glomerulonephritis.
A 10-year-old Laotian boy had homozygous deficiency of the third component of complement and recurrent bacterial infections beginning at age 5 months. Cellular and humoral immunity were normal, as were polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis and bactericidal activities. Serum complement-mediated hemolytic, chemotactic, and opsonic activities were deficient. In vitro addition of purified C3 to patient serum restored hemolytic complement to normal levels, and plasma infusion during each of four episodes of pneumonia significantly enhanced serum opsonic activity for as long as 36 hours. A renal biopsy specimen revealed mesangiopathic glomerulonephritis, although significant levels of circulating IgG immune complexes were not detected. These findings further support the association of C3 deficiency with immune-complex disease and suggest that plasma infusion may be an adjunct to antibiotic therapy in the management of severe pyogenic infections in patients with C3 deficiency.. 

glomerulonephritis
mesangiopathic glomerulonephritis
Complement deficiency and nephritis. A report of a family.
A family is described in which three children had homozygous deficiency of C3 and in which both parents and two other children were heterozygous for the C3 null gene. One child with heterozygous C3 deficiency was found to have membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; proteinuria and/or microscopical haematuria was present in all three homozygous C3-deficient children. All children with homozygous or heterozygous C3 deficiency were, to a varying degree, susceptible to infection. The only child of the family with normal complement had no increased risk of infection and no renal disease. This family study provides further support for the proposal that C3 deficiency predisposes to nephritis.. 

glomerulonephritis