Three novel aniridia mutations in the human PAX6 gene.
Aniridia (iris hypoplasia) is an autosomal dominant congenital disorder of the eye. Mutations in the human aniridia (PAX6) gene have now been identified in many patients from various ethnic groups. In the study reported here we describe PAX6 mutations in one sporadic and five familial cases with aniridia. Of the four different mutations identified, one was identical to a previously reported mutation (C-- > T transition at codon 240), and three were novel  two in the glycine-rich region and one in the proline/serine/threonine-rich (PST) region. One PAX6 mutation found in the PST region was associated with cataracts in an aniridia family. Another splice mutation in the PST domain occurred in an aniridia patient with anosmia (inability to smell). The six new aniridia cases reported here have mutations predicted to generate incomplete PAX6 proteins. These results support the theory that human aniridia is caused by haploinsufficiency of PAX6.. 

autosomal dominant congenital disorder of the eye
PAX6 mutations in aniridia.
Aniridia is a congenital malformation of the eye, chiefly characterised by iris hypoplasia, which can cause blindness. The PAX6 gene was isolated as a candidate aniridia gene by positional cloning from the smallest region of overlap of aniridia-associated deletions. Subsequently PAX6 intragenic mutations were demonstrated in Smalleye, a mouse mutant which is an animal model for aniridia, and six human aniridia patients. In this paper we describe four additional PAX6 point mutations in aniridia patients, both sporadic and familial. These mutations highlight regions of the gene which are essential for normal PAX6 function. In addition, the frequency at which we have found PAX6 mutations suggests that lesions in PAX6 will account for most cases of aniridia.. 

congenital malformation of the eye
Missense mutation in the alternative splice region of the PAX6 gene in eye anomalies.
The PAX6 gene is involved in ocular morphogenesis, and PAX6 mutations have been detected in various types of ocular anomalies, including aniridia, Peters anomaly, corneal dystrophy, congenital cataract, and foveal hypoplasia. The gene encodes a transcriptional regulator that recognizes target genes through its paired-type DNA-binding domain. The paired domain is composed of two distinct DNA-binding subdomains, the N-terminal subdomain (NTS) and the C-terminal subdomain (CTS), which bind respective consensus DNA sequences. The human PAX6 gene produces two alternative splice isoforms that have the distinct structure of the paired domain. The insertion, into the NTS, of 14 additional amino acids encoded by exon 5a abolishes the DNA-binding activity of the NTS and unmasks the DNA-binding ability of the CTS. Thus, exon 5a appears to function as a molecular switch that specifies target genes. We ascertained a novel missense mutation in four pedigrees with Peters anomaly, congenital cataract, Axenfeldt anomaly, and/or foveal hypoplasia, which, to our knowledge, is the first mutation identified in the splice-variant region. A T-- > A transition at the 20th nucleotide position of exon 5a results in a Val-- > Asp (GTC-- > GAC) substitution at the 7th codon of the alternative splice region. Functional analyses demonstrated that the V54D mutation slightly increased NTS binding and decreased CTS transactivation activity to almost half.. 

eye anomalies
ocular anomalies