Pendred syndrome: phenotypic variability in two families carrying the same PDS missense mutation.
Pendred syndrome comprises congenital sensorineural hearing loss, thyroid goiter, and positive perchlorate discharge test. Recently, this autosomal recessive disorder was shown to be caused by mutations in the PDS gene, which encodes an anion transporter called pendrin. Molecular analysis of the PDS gene was performed in two consanguineous large families from Southern Tunisia comprising a total of 23 individuals affected with profound congenital deafness; the same missense mutation, L445W, was identified in all affected individuals. A widened vestibular aqueduct was found in all patients who underwent computed tomography (CT) scan exploration of the inner ear. In contrast, goiter was present in only 11 affected individuals, who interestingly had a normal result of the perchlorate discharge test whenever performed. The present results question the sensitivity of the perchlorate test for the diagnosis of Pendred syndrome and support the use of a molecular analysis of the PDS gene in the assessment of individuals with severe to profound congenital hearing loss associated with inner ear morphological anomaly even in the absence of a thyroid goiter.. 

congenital sensorineural hearing loss
Splice-site mutation in the PDS gene may result in intrafamilial variability for deafness in Pendred syndrome.
Pendred syndrome is a recessive inherited disorder that consists of developmental abnormalities of the cochlea, sensorineural hearing loss, and diffuse thyroid enlargement (goiter). This disorder may account for up to 10% of cases of hereditary deafness. The disease gene (PDS) has been mapped to chromosome 7q22-q31, and encodes a chloride-iodide transport protein. We performed mutation analysis of individual exons of the PDS gene in one Spanish family that shows intrafamilial variability of the deafness phenotype (two patients with profound and one with moderate-severe deafness). We identified a new splice-site mutation affecting intron 4 of the PDS gene, at nucleotide position 639 + 7. RNA analysis from lymphocytes of the affected patients showed that mutation 639 + 7A-- > G generates a new donor splice site, leading to an mRNA with an insertion of six nucleotides from intron 4 of PDS. Since the newly created donor splice site is likely to compete with the normal one, variations of the levels of normal and aberrant transcripts of the PDS gene in the cochlea may explain the variability in the deafness presentation.. 

sensorineural hearing loss
Alstrom syndrome: further evidence for linkage to human chromosome 2p13.
Alstrom syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by retinal degeneration, sensorineural hearing loss, early-onset obesity, and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. The gene for Alstrom syndrome (ALMS1) has been previously localized to human chromosome 2p13 by homozygosity mapping in two distinct isolated populations - French Acadian and North African. Pair-wise analyses resulted in maximum lod (logarithm of the odds ratio) scores of 3. 84 and 2. 9, respectively. To confirm these findings, a large linkage study was performed in twelve additional families segregating for Alstrom syndrome. A maximum two-point lod score of 7. 13 (theta = 0. 00) for marker D2S2110 and a maximum cumulative multipoint lod score of 9. 16 for marker D2S2110 were observed, further supporting linkage to chromosome 2p13. No evidence of genetic heterogeneity was observed in these families. Meiotic recombination events have localized the critical region containing ALMS1 to a 6. 1-cM interval flanked by markers D2S327 and D2S286. A fine resolution radiation hybrid map of 31 genes and markers has been constructed.

sensorineural hearing loss
Sulfate transport is not impaired in pendred syndrome thyrocytes.
Pendred syndrome is the most common form of syndromic deafness, characterized by dyshormonogenic goiter associated with sensory-neural deafness. The gene responsible for the disease (PDS) has been cloned, but its function is as yet unknown and the connection between thyroid goiter and sensory-neural deafness remains an enigma. PDS codes for a novel protein, pendrin, which is closely related to a number of sufate transporters. Mechanisms by which abnormal sulfate transport could deleteriously affect iodide organification have been proposed. We tested sulfate transport in thyrocytes obtained from Pendred syndrome patients and found that it was not defective. This suggests that pendrin in fact may not be a sulfate transporter, and emphasizes the importance of functional studies on this novel protein.. 

sensory-neural deafness
sensory-neural deafness
The Norrie disease gene maps to a 150 kb region on chromosome Xp11.3.
Norrie disease is a human X-linked recessive disorder of unknown etiology characterized by congenital blindness, sensory neural deafness and mental retardation. This disease gene was previously linked to the DXS7 (L1. 28) locus and the MAO genes in band Xp11. 3 3. We report here fine physical mapping of the obligate region containing the Norrie disease gene (NDP) defined by a recombination and by the smallest submicroscopic chromosomal deletion associated with Norrie disease identified to date. Analysis, using in addition two overlapping YAC clones from this region, allowed orientation of the MAOA and MAOB genes in a 5-3-3-5 configuration. A recombination event between a (GT) n polymorphism in intron 2 of the MAOB gene and the NDP locus, in a family previously reported to have a recombination between DXS7 and NDP, delineates a flanking marker telomeric to this disease gene. An anonymous DNA probe, dc12, present in one of the YACs and in a patient with a submicroscopic deletion which includes MAOA and MAOB but not L1. 28, serves as a flanking marker centromeric to the disease gene. An Alu-PCR fragment from the right arm of the MAO YAC (YMAO. AluR) is not deleted in this patient and also delineates the centromeric extent of the obligate disease region. The apparent order of these loci is telomere. DXS7-MAOA-MAOB-NDP-dc12-YMAO DXS7-MAOA-MAOB-NDP-dc12-YMAO. AluR. centromere. Together these data define the obligate region containing the NDP gene to a chromosomal segment less than 150 kb.

sensory neural deafness
The Pendred syndrome gene encodes a chloride-iodide transport protein.
Pendred syndrome is the most common form of syndromic deafness and characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and goitre. This disorder was mapped to chromosome 7 and the gene causing Pendred syndrome (PDS) was subsequently identified by positional cloning. PDS encodes a putative transmembrane protein designated pendrin. Pendrin is closely related to a family of sulfate transport proteins that includes the rat sulfate-anion transporter (encoded by Sat-1; 29% amino acid sequence identity), the human diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (encoded by DTD; 32%) and the human sulfate transporter downregulated in adenoma (encoded by DRA; 45%). On the basis of this homology and the presence of a slightly modified sulfate-transporter signature sequence comprising its putative second transmembrane domain, pendrin has been proposed to function as a sulfate transporter. We were unable to detect evidence of sulfate transport following the expression of pendrin in Xenopus laevis oocytes by microinjection of PDS cRNA or in Sf9 cells following infection with PDS-recombinant baculovirus. The rates of transport for iodide and chloride were significantly increased following the expression of pendrin in both cell systems. Our results demonstrate that pendrin functions as a transporter of chloride and iodide, but not sulfate, and may provide insight into thyroid physiology and the pathophysiology of Pendred syndrome.. 

sensorineural hearing loss
Clinical and molecular genetics of primary dystonias.
Primary dystonias are movement disorders with dystonia as a major symptom. They are frequently inherited as Mendelian traits. There are at least eight clinically distinct autosomal dominant and two X-linked recessive forms. In addition, pedigree analyses suggest the occurrence of an autosomal recessive variant. The clinical classification is increasingly being replaced by a genetic one. To date gene loci have been identified in at least six autosomal dominant forms, i. e., in idiopathic torsion dystonia (9q34), focal dystonia (18p), adult-onset idiopathic torsion dystonia of mixed type (8p21-q22), dopa-responsive dystonia (14q22. 1-q22. 2), and paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis (2q25-q33; 1p21-p13. 3). Gene loci in the X-linked recessive  forms have been assigned to Xq13. 1 in the X-linked dystonia parkinsonism syndrome and to Xq22 in X-linked sensorineural deafness, dystonia, and mental retardation. The disease genes have been identified in two autosomal dominant forms and in one X-linked recessive form. Mutations in a gene coding for an ATP-binding protein were detected in idiopathic torsion dystonia (DYT1), and the GTP cyclohydrolase 1 gene is mutated in dopa-responsive dystonia (DYT5). In sensorineural deafness, dystonia, and mental retardation , mutations were found in the gene DDP coding for a polypeptide of unknown function. This article reviews the clinical and molecular genetics of primary dystonias, critically discusses present findings, and proposes referring to the known forms, most of which can be distinguished by genetic criteria, as dystonias 1-12.

sensorineural deafness