Mice deficient in Six5 develop cataracts: implications for myotonic dystrophy.
Expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in the 3 UTR of the gene DMPK at the DM1 locus on chromosome 19 causes myotonic dystrophy, a dominantly inherited disease characterized by skeletal muscle dystrophy and myotonia, cataracts and cardiac conduction defects. Targeted deletion of Dm15, the mouse orthologue of human DMPK, produced mice with a mild myopathy and cardiac conduction abnormalities, but without other features of myotonic dystrophy, such as myotonia and cataracts. We, and others, have demonstrated that repeat expansion decreases expression of the adjacent gene SIX5 (refs 7, 8), which encodes a homeodomain transcription factor. To determine whether SIX5 deficiency contributes to the myotonic dystrophy phenotype, we disrupted mouse Six5 by replacing the first exon with a beta-galactosidase reporter. Six5-mutant mice showed reporter expression in multiple tissues, including the developing lens. Homozygous mutant mice had no apparent abnormalities of skeletal muscle function, but developed lenticular opacities at a higher rate than controls. Our results suggest that SIX5 deficiency contributes to the cataract phenotype in myotonic dystrophy, and that myotonic dystrophy represents a multigenic disorder.. 

cardiac conduction abnormalities
Emerin, deficiency of which causes Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, is localized at the inner nuclear membrane.
X-linked recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an inherited muscle disorder characterized by the clinical triad of progressive wasting of humero-peroneal muscles, early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and postcervical muscles, and cardiac conduction block with a high risk of sudden death. The gene for EDMD on Xq28 encodes a novel protein named emerin that localizes at the nuclear membrane of skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscles and some other non-muscle tissues. To investigate a possible physiological role for emerin, we examined the ultrastructural localization of the protein in human skeletal muscle and HeLa cells, using ultrathin cryosections. We found that the immune-labeled colloidal gold particles were localized on the nucleoplasmic surface of the inner nuclear membrane, but not on the nuclear pore. Emerin stayed on the cytoplasmic surface of the nuclear lamina, even after detergent treatment that solubilizes membrane lipids and washes out membrane proteins. These results suggest that emerin anchors at the inner nuclear membrane through the hydrophobic stretch, and protrudes from the hydrophilic region to the nucleoplasm where it interacts with the nuclear lamina. We speculate that emerin contributes to maintain the nuclear structure and stability, as well as nuclear functions, particularly in muscle tissues that have severe stress with rigorous contraction-relaxation movements and calcium flux.. 

cardiac conduction block