Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency inhibits in vitro growth of Plasmodium falciparum.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD; EC 1. 1. 1. 49) -deficient red blood cells from male hemizygotes and female heterozygotes from the island of Sardinia were studied for their ability to support growth in vitro of the malaria-causing organism Plasmodium falciparum. Parasite growth was approximately one-third of normal in both hemi- and heterozygotes for G6PD deficiency. In Sardinians with the beta 0-thalassemia trait, parasite growth was normal except when G6PD deficiency occurred together with the thalassemia trait. The data support the hypothesis that G6PD deficiency may confer a selective advantage in a malarious area; the female heterozygote may be at a particular advantage because resistance to malaria equals that of male hemizygotes, but the risk of fatal hemolysis may be less. However, more female heterozygotes must be studied to confirm this hypothesis. No protective effect of beta 0-thalassemia trait could be demonstrated in vitro. 

fatal hemolysis
New genetic variants of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in Italy.
Six new variants of human erythrocyte G6PD have been characterized. All of them were found in Italian males and all were associated with enzyme deficiency, but only two with signs of haemolysis. These and other variants reported in the literature, which must thus far be regarded as sporadic, are found to map in parts of Italy where common types of G6PD deficiency are also prevalent.. 

haemolysis
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria with coexisting deficiency of the ninth component of complement: lack of massive haemolytic attack.
A 47-year-old woman with paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) was found to have an inherited deficiency in the ninth complement component (C9). In complement-sensitivity lysis tests, 80% of her erythrocytes were markedly complement-sensitive (PNH-III). Laser cytofluorimetry with a monoclonal antibody against decay-accelerating factor (DAF) revealed that 95% of her erythrocytes were DAF-negative. Surprisingly, she has suffered only mild haemolysis and has never experienced massive spontaneous haemolysis. Gross haemoglobinuria and jaundice occurred only after receiving postoperative transfusion of whole blood. In her serum, C9 was not detectable either by immunological or by functional assays. Both the Ham test and the sugar water test using normal human serum or plasma yielded marked haemolysis of the patients erythrocytes. When the patients serum or plasma was used, only a trace of lysis was detected. Addition of purified human C9 to her plasma fully restored haemolysis. These observations indicated that C9 may play a critical role in haemolytic attacks in patients with PNH and that characteristic haemolysis in PNH may be tempered by coexisting C9 deficiency.. 

haemolytic attack
haemolysis
haemolysis
haemolytic attacks
haemolysis
A new glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase variant (G6PD Nagano) associated with congenital hemolytic anemia.
A new glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) variant associated with chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia was reported. The patient, a 6-year-old Japanese male, was noticed to have hemolytic anemia soon after birth, and a diagnosis of G6PD deficiency was made at the age of 2. He had episodes of hemolytic crisis several times after upper respiratory infection. G6PD activity of the patient was 5. 5% of normal. The enzymatic characteristics were examined when he was 5 years old, and his G6PD showed faster-than-normal electrophoretic mobility, low Km G6P, high Km NADP, low Ki NADPH, normal utilization of substrate analogues, heat instability, and a normal pH optimum curve. From these results, this was considered to be a new variant and was designated G6PD Nagano. Infection-induced hemolysis and chronic hemolytic anemia seem to be due to markedly impaired enzyme activity and thermal instability. 

hemolytic crisis
hemolysis
Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia (CNSHA) and glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in a patient with familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP). Molecular study of a new variant (G6PD Clinic) with markedly acidic pH optimum.
A new glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) variant with severe erythrocytic G6PD deficiency and a unique pH optimum is described in a young patient with chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia (CNSHA) and familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP). Chronic hemolysis was present in the absence of infections, oxidant drugs or ingestion of faba beans. Residual enzyme activity was about 2. 6% and 63% of normal activity in erythrocytes and leucocytes, respectively. A molecular study using standard methods showed G6PD in the patient to have normal electrophoretic mobility (at pH 7. 0, 8. 0 and 8. 8), normal apparent affinity for substrates (Km, G6P and NADP) and a slightly abnormal utilization of substrate analogues (decreased deamino-NADP and increased 2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate utilization). Heat stability was found to be markedly decreased (8% of residual activity after 20 min of incubation at 46 degrees C) and a particular characteristic of this enzyme was a biphasic pH curve with a greatly increased activity at low pH. Although molecular characteristics of this variant closely resemble those of G6PD Bangkok and G6PD Duarte, it can be distinguished from these and all other previously reported variants by virtue of its unusual pH curve. Therefore the present variant has been designated G6PD Clinic to distinguish it from other G6PD variants previously described 

Chronic hemolysis