A mutation in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of the FGD1 gene in an Italian family with faciogenital dysplasia (Aarskog-Scott syndrome).
Aarskog-Scott Syndrome (AAS) is an X-linked disorder characterised by short stature and multiple facial, limb and genital abnormalities. A gene, FGD1, altered in a patient with AAS phenotype, has been identified and found to encode a protein with homology to Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors (Rho/Rac GEF). However, since this original report on identification of a mutated FGD1 gene in an AAS patient, no additional mutations in the FGD1 gene have been described. We analysed 13 independent patients with clinical diagnosis of AAS. One patient presented a mutation that results in a nucleotide change in exon 10 of the FGD1 gene (G2559 > A) substituting a Gln for Arg in position 610. The mutation was found to segregate with the AAS phenotype in affected males and carrier females in the family of this patient. Interestingly, Arg-610 is located within one of the two pleckstrin homology (PH) domains of the FGD1 gene and it corresponds to a highly conserved residue which has been involved in InsP binding in PH domains of other proteins. The same residue is often mutated in the Brutons tyrosine kinase (Btk) gene in patients with an X-linked agammaglobulinemia. The Arg610Gln mutation represents the first case of a mutation in the PH domain of the FGD1 gene and additional evidence that mutations in PH domains can be associated to human diseases.. 

short stature
Null mutation of the murine ATP7B (Wilson disease) gene results in intracellular copper accumulation and late-onset hepatic nodular transformation.
The Atp7b protein is a copper-transporting ATPase expressed predominantly in the liver and to a lesser extent in most other tissues. Mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to Wilson disease, a copper toxicity disorder characterized by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent hepatic and neuro-logical abnormalities. Using homologous recombination to disrupt the normal translation of ATP7B, we have generated a strain of mice that are homozygous mutants (null) for the Wilson disease gene. The ATP7B null mice display a gradual accumulation of hepatic copper that increases to a level 60-fold greater than normal by 5 months of age. An increase in copper concentration was also observed in the kidney, brain, placenta and lactating mammary glands of homo-zygous mutants, although milk from the mutant glands was copper deficient. Morphological abnormalities resembling cirrhosis developed in the majority of the livers from homozygous mutants older than 7 months of age. Progeny of the homozygous mutant females demonstrated neurological abnormalities and growth retardation characteristic of copper deficiency. Copper concentration in the livers of the newborn homozygous null mutants was decreased dramatically. In summary, inactivation of the murine ATP7B gene produces a form of cirrhotic liver disease that resembles Wilson disease in humans and the toxic milk phenotype in the mouse.. 

growth retardation
Homozygosity mapping in a family with microcephaly, mental retardation, and short stature to a Cohen syndrome region on 8q21.3-8q22.1: redefining a clinical entity.
A syndrome of microcephaly, progressive postnatal growth deficiency, and mental retardation was observed in two brothers and their cousin from a multiply consanguineous kindred of Lebanese descent. Hypotonia, chorioretinal dystrophy, and myopia were also identified. The severity of the condition varied among the closely related patients. Because of absence of a distinctive facial appearance, the degree of mental retardation, and short stature, the initially considered clinical diagnosis of Cohen syndrome was withdrawn and a novel genetic entity was assumed. Homozygosity mapping in this family assigned the gene to a 26. 8-cM region on the chromosome band 8q21. 3 -22. 1, between the microsatellites at D8S270 and D8S514. The maximum two-point LOD score was found for marker at D8S267 (Zmax = 3.. 237 at Omax = 0. 00). Intriguingly enough, the identified gene region overlaps the refined gene region for Cohen syndrome (COH1) [Kolehmainen et al., 1997  Euro J Hum Genet 5  206-213]. This fact encourages the hypothesis that the described kindred segregates for a variant of Cohen syndrome and suggests a redefinition of its phenotype 

short stature
postnatal growth deficiency
short stature
Growth retardation and tumour inhibition by BRCA1.
Inherited mutations in BRCA1 predispose to breast and ovarian cancer, but the role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast and ovarian cancer has previously been elusive. Here, we show that retroviral transfer of the wild-type BRCA1 gene inhibits growth in vitro of all breast and ovarian cancer cell lines tested, but not colon or lung cancer cells or fibroblasts. Mutant BRCA1 has no effect on growth of breast cancer cells; ovarian cancer cell growth is not affected by BRCA1 mutations in the 5 portion of the gene, but is inhibited by 3 BRCA1 mutations. Development of MCF-7 tumours in nude mice is inhibited when MCF-7 cells are transfected with wild-type, but not mutant, BRCA1. Most importantly, among mice with established MCF-7 tumours, peritoneal treatment with a retroviral vector expressing wild-type BRCA1 significantly inhibits tumour growth and increased survival.. 

Growth retardation
Targeted modification of the apolipoprotein B gene results in hypobetalipoproteinemia and developmental abnormalities in mice.
Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia is an autosomal codominant disorder resulting in a dramatic reduction in plasma concentrations of apolipoprotein (apo) B, cholesterol, and beta-migrating lipoproteins. A benefit of hypobetalipoproteinemia is that mildly affected individuals may be protected from coronary vascular disease. We have used gene targeting to generate mice with a modified Apob allele. Mice containing this allele display all of the hallmarks of human hypobetalipoproteinemia  they produce a truncated apoB protein, apoB70, and have markedly decreased plasma concentrations of apoB, beta-lipoproteins, and total cholesterol. In addition, the mice manifest several characteristics that are occasionally observed in human hypobetalipoproteinemia, including reduced plasma triglyceride concentrations, fasting chylomicronemia, and reduced high density lipoprotein cholesterol. An unexpected finding is that the modified Apob allele is strongly associated with exencephalus and hydrocephalus. These mice should help increase our understanding of hypobetalipoproteinemia, atherogenesis, and the etiology of exencephalus and hydrocephalus.. 

developmental abnormalities
Maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 in a boy with a normal karyotype.
We report on a boy with a maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 (UPD (14)). At 7 years of age he was referred to us by the paediatrician because of symptoms of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). He showed short stature, obesity, mild developmental delay, cryptorchidism, and some mild dysmorphic features. The history further indicated intrauterine growth retardation at the end of the pregnancy. His mother was 44 years of age at the time of his birth. After birth he showed hypotonia with poor sucking, for which gavage feeding was needed. Motor development was delayed. After 1 year he became obese despite a normal appetite. Recurrent middle ear infections, a high pain threshold, and a great skill with jigsaw puzzles were reported. There were no behavioural problems or sleep disturbance. Chromosomal analysis was normal (46, XY). DNA analysis for Prader-Willi syndrome showed no abnormalities. Two years later he was re-examined because we thought his features fitted the PWS-like phenotype associated with maternal UPD (14). At that time precocious puberty was evident. DNA analysis showed maternal heterodisomy for chromosome 14. In all the previously described 11 cases with maternal UPD (14), a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14 was detected cytogenetically before DNA analysis. This is the first report of diagnosis of maternal UPD (14) based on clinical features. This finding underlines the importance of DNA analysis for maternal UPD (14) in patients with a similar PWS-like phenotype even without previous identification of a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14.. 

short stature
Microdeletions at chromosome bands 1q32-q41 as a cause of Van der Woude syndrome.
Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) is an autosomal dominant disorder comprising cleft lip and/or cleft palate and lip pits. We reported previously a family whose underlying mutation is a 500-800 kb deletion localized to chromosome bands 1q32-q41 [Sander et al., 1994  Hum Mol Genet 3  576-578]. Along with cleft lip/palate and lip pits, affected relatives exhibit developmental delays, suggesting that the function of a gene nearby may also be disrupted. To further localize the VWS gene we searched for other deletions that cause VWS. An allele loss assay was performed using a novel highly polymorphic marker, D1S3753. From a panel of 37 unrelated individuals, we detected an allele loss in one family, indicating the presence of a deletion. In this family, the phenotype in three generations of affected individuals was confined to the cardinal signs of VWS. Surprisingly, mapping of the new deletion showed that it extended 0. 2-1 Mb beyond the proximal breakpoint for the deletion described previously. No deletions were detected in seven cases of popliteal pterygia syndrome, 76 cases of mixed syndromic forms of cleft lip and palate, and 178 cases of nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate. 

developmental delays
A single amino acid substitution (G103D) in the type II collagen triple helix produces Kniest dysplasia.
Kniest dysplasia is a moderately severe chondrodysplasia phenotype that results from mutations in the gene for type II collagen, COL2A1. Characteristics of the disorder include a short trunk and extremities, mid-face hypoplasia, cleft palate, myopia, retinal detachment, and hearing loss. Recently, deletions of all or part of exon 12 have been identified in individuals with Kniest dysplasia, suggesting that mutations within this region of the protein may primarily result in the Kniest dysplasia phenotype. We used SSCP to analyze an amplified genomic DNA fragment containing exon 12 from seven individuals with Kniest dysplasia. An abnormality was identified in one patient. DNA sequence analysis demonstrated that the patient was heterozygous for a G to A transition that implied substitution of glycine103 of the triple helical domain by aspartate. The mutation was not observed in DNA from either of the clinically unaffected parents of the proband. Protein microsequencing demonstrated expression of the abnormal allele in cartilage. These data demonstrate that point mutations which result in single amino acid substitutions can produce Kniest dysplasia and further support the hypothesis that alteration of a domain, which includes the region encoded by exon 12, in the type II collagen protein leads to this disorder.. 

short trunk and extremities