Molecular epidemiology of C9 deficiency heterozygotes with an Arg95Stop mutation of the C9 gene in Japan.
Deficiency of the ninth component of human complement (C9) is the most common complement deficiency in Japan, with an incidence of approximately one homozygote in 1000, but is very rare in other countries. Genetic analyses of Japanese C9 deficiency have shown that a C-to-T transition leading to TGA stop codon for Arg95 in exon 4 of the C9 gene (Arg95Stop) is common in Japanese C9 deficiency. To determine the prevalence of heterozygous carriers of the Arg95Stop mutation in a Japanese population, we collected DNA samples from 300 individuals in two of the four main islands of Japan. Heterozygote detection was performed with an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) system designed to detect exclusively only one of the normal and mutant alleles, followed by confirmation with PCR/single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and direct sequencing. Twenty individuals were heterozygous for the Arg95Stop mutation. None was homozygous. The prevalence of carriers of the Arg95Stop mutation was 6. 7% (20/300). An estimated frequency (0. 12%) of complete C9 deficiency due to homozygous Arg95Stop mutation was consistent with frequencies determined by serological studies 

complement deficiency
Hereditary deficiency of C5 in association with discoid lupus erythematosus.
A 29-year-old woman with discoid lupus erythematosus had undetectable classic pathway complement activity. Hypocomplementemia was due to selective deficiency of C5. One of her children was also deficient. To our knowledge this is the first documented case of an association between discoid lupus erythematosus and C5 deficiency.. 

Hypocomplementemia
Hereditary deficiency of the seventh component of complement and recurrent meningococcal infection: investigations of an Irish family using a novel haemolytic screening assay for complement activity and C7 M/N allotyping.
Terminal complement component deficiency predisposes to meningococcal infection and is inherited in an autosomal co-dominant manner. An Irish family is described, in which 2 of 3 brothers had recurrent meningococcal infection. A novel screening assay was used to investigate for terminal complement deficiency and the 2 affected brothers were found to be completely deficient in the seventh component of complement (C7). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for C7 revealed lower than normal levels in the remaining brother and parents. C7 M/N protein polymorphism allotyping, used to investigate the segregation of the C7 deficiency genes, showed that the apparently complement sufficient brother was heterozygous C7 deficient and a carrier of one of the deficiency genes. Complement screening should be carried out in any individual suffering recurrent meningococcal infection or infection with an uncommon meningococcal serogroup. Identification of complement deficient patients allows the implementation of strategies to prevent recurrent infection.. 

Terminal complement component deficiency
terminal complement deficiency
complement deficient
Coincident Kaposi sarcoma and T-cell lymphoma in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
A 24 year old male with a history of eczema, recurrent mild infections, and thrombocytopenia consistent with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) presented with a mediastinal mass, generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and severe thrombocytopenia. Studies of immune function including immunoglobulin levels and T-cell subsets were normal. Furthermore, his T lymphocytes proliferated normally in response to phytohemagglutinin, concanavalin A, and the combination of neuraminidase/galactose oxidase. However, their proliferative responses to anti-CD43 antibody and periodate were diminished, consistent with the clinical diagnosis of WAS. An initial inguinal lymph node biopsy surprisingly revealed Kaposi sarcoma. However, following splenectomy to increase the platelet count, biopsy of the mediastinal mass revealed T-cell large cell lymphoma. Studies of biopsied tissue for the presence of Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were negative, as were studies of blood, including the polymerase chain reaction, for the presence of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This is the first report of Kaposi sarcoma arising in a patient with a congenital immunodeficiency syndrome. Although Kaposi sarcoma can arise in the face of the severe immunosuppression that follows allograft transplantation and in patients infected with HIV, we postulate that longevity in the face of mild immunosuppression was the major factor in the development of Kaposi sarcoma in this patient.. 

congenital immunodeficiency syndrome
Fatal pyoderma gangrenosum in association with C7 deficiency.
Although pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is often associated with systemic diseases, it has not been reported in association with congenital complement deficiencies. We describe an aggressive and ultimately fatal case of PG in a patient with a congenital C7 deficiency. Deficiencies of C7 can be associated with decreased neutrophil chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and opsonization, similar to the immunologic abnormalities described in patients with PG. Our patients decreased complement level, if not directly related to the development of PG, may have contributed to the aggressive nature of her disease.. 

congenital complement deficiencies
immunologic abnormalities
Complement factor 2 deficiency: a clinical and serological family study.
Inherited complement deficiencies are associated with a variety of connective tissue diseases. A family with inherited deficiency of complement factor 2 (C2) is described in which two family members with homozygous C2 deficiency developed cutaneous vasculitis and sicca syndrome. The other family members had heterozygous C2 deficiency and each member had the HLA-A25, B18, DR2 (w15) haplotype. The mother had seropositive rheumatoid arthritis. Further studies showed the presence of cryoglobulins, antibodies against endothelial cells, and anticardiolipin antibodies.. 

Inherited complement deficiencies
Somatic rearrangement of chromosome 14 in human lymphocytes.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare genetic disorder associated with immune deficiency, chromosome instability, and a predisposition to lymphoid malignancy. We have detected chromosomally anomalous clones of lymphocytes in eight patients with this disorder. Chromosome banding disclosed that the clones are consistently marked by structural rearrangement of the long arm (q) of chromosome 14. A translocation involving 14q was found in clones obtained from seven of the eight patients whereas a ring 14 chromosome was found in a clone obtained from the other. These findings as well as data obtained by others for patients with ataxia-telangiectasia suggest that structural rearrangement of 14q is the initial chromosomal change in lymphocyte clones of patients with this disorder. Chromosomes of lymphocytes from one of the patients were studied before and after the onset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Before leukemia was diagnosed, the patient had a lymphocyte clone with a 14q translocation. This clone appears to have given rise to the leukemic cells. We hypothesize that structural rearrangement of 14q is directly related to abnormal growth of lymphocytes and that it may be a step toward the development of lymphoid malignancies. Increasing evidence, provided by others, for the nonrandom involvement of 14q in African-type Burkitts lymphoma and other lymphoid neoplasms further strengthens this hypothesis.. 

immune deficiency
Complement deficiency and nephritis. A report of a family.
A family is described in which three children had homozygous deficiency of C3 and in which both parents and two other children were heterozygous for the C3 null gene. One child with heterozygous C3 deficiency was found to have membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; proteinuria and/or microscopical haematuria was present in all three homozygous C3-deficient children. All children with homozygous or heterozygous C3 deficiency were, to a varying degree, susceptible to infection. The only child of the family with normal complement had no increased risk of infection and no renal disease. This family study provides further support for the proposal that C3 deficiency predisposes to nephritis.. 

Complement deficiency
Identification of WASP mutations in patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and isolated thrombocytopenia reveals allelic heterogeneity at the WAS locus.
Mutation in the gene encoding the recently isolated WASP protein has now been identified as the genetic defect responsible for the X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), a primary immunodeficiency disease associated with extensive phenotypic variability. To elucidate the range of WASP mutations responsible for WAS, we used PCR-SSCP analysis to screen for WASP gene mutation in 19 unrelated boys with the diagnosis of classical or attenuated WAS or isolated thrombocytopenia. All 19 patients had WASP mutations, each of which localized to the initial three or terminal three exons of the gene, and the majority of which were unique in each case. However, a missense mutation which results in substitution of the arginine at WAS codon 86 was identified in three boys with severe WAS as well as in one boy presenting with thrombocytopenia alone. While the three mutations found in the isolated thrombocytopenia patients leave the reading frame intact, about one-half of the gene alterations detected in both severe and attenuated WAS patients result in frameshifted transcript and premature translation termination. These findings therefore confirm the association of WAS with WASP mutation and identify WASP mutation as a cause for isolated congenital thrombocytopenia in males. While the WASP gene defects responsible for isolated thrombocytopenia and other mild presentations of WAS do not appear distinct from those resulting in severe WAS, these data indicate that analysis of WASP gene mutation provides a valuable tool for distinguishing the spectrum of WAS patients and the subset of males with isolated thrombocytopenia who represent mild cases of WAS.. 

immunodeficiency disease
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked congenital thrombocytopenia are caused by mutations of the same gene.
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-linked recessive disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia, small platelets, eczema, recurrent infections, and immunodeficiency. Besides the classic WAS phenotype, there is a group of patients with congenital X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) who have small platelets but only transient eczema, if any, and minimal immune deficiency. Because the gene responsible for WAS has been sequenced, it was possible to correlate the WAS phenotypes with WAS gene mutations. Using a fingerprinting screening technique, we determined the approximate location of the mutation in 13 unrelated WAS patients with mild to severe clinical symptoms. Direct sequence analysis of cDNA and genomic DNA obtained from patient-derived cell lines showed 12 unique mutations distributed throughout the WAS gene, including insertions, deletions, and point mutations resulting in amino acid substitutions, termination, exon skipping, or splicing defects. Of 4 unrelated patients with the XLT phenotype, 3 had missense mutations affecting exon 2 and 1 had a splice-site mutation affecting exon 9. Patients with classic WAS had more complex mutations, resulting in termination codons, frameshift, and early termination. These findings provide direct evidence that XLT and WAS are caused by mutations of the same gene and suggest that severe clinical phenotypes are associated with complex mutations.. 

immunodeficiency
immune deficiency
Heterozygous C2-deficiency and myasthenia gravis.
Complement deficiency states in myasthenia gravis (MG) have not been reported previously. We describe a 19-year-old woman with typical MG and heterozygous C2 deficiency, along with HLA typing of the patient and her immediate family.. 

Complement deficiency
Recurrent meningitis in a patient with congenital deficiency of the C9 component of complement. First case of C9 deficiency in Europe.
We describe the first cases, to our knowledge, of C9 deficiency in Europe that were detected in a Swiss family, of which two members--one with a complete deficiency and the other with approximately half-normal C9 levels--experienced bacterial meningitis. The index patient, a 56-year-old white man with a history of purulent meningitis at the age of 23 years, presented with an acute meningococcal meningitis. No impairment of cellular immunity or immunoglobulin deficiency could be found. Complement assays showed a complete deficiency of the C9 component, while the other individual component levels were normal and the hemolytic activity (measured using the CH50 assay) was only slightly reduced. A family study revealed complete C9 deficiency in the patients healthy brother and half-normal C9 concentrations in his sister, his son (who also had experienced an episode of bacterial meningitis), and his niece, consistent with an inherited C9 deficiency. This first case of recurrent meningitis in a white patient with complete C9 deficiency suggests that this complement defect may also be a risk factor for bacterial, especially neisserial, infections.. 

impairment of cellular immunity
complement defect
Hereditary C2 deficiency associated with common variable immunodeficiency.
Homozygous C2 deficiency in a 19-year-old boy was associated with variable immunodeficiency manifested by marked hypoimmunoglobulinemia and impaired antibody responses, normal circulating B lymphocytes, and subnormal T-cell functions. Neither antilymphocytic autoantibodies nor chromosomal abnormalities were found. Serum immunoglobulin levels were within normal limits in his parents and brother who were heterozygous for C2 deficiency. The patients lymphocytes were homozygous at the HLA-D locus but expressed an antigen different from DW2.. 

immunodeficiency
immunodeficiency
hypoimmunoglobulinemia