Pendred syndrome: phenotypic variability in two families carrying the same PDS missense mutation.
Pendred syndrome comprises congenital sensorineural hearing loss, thyroid goiter, and positive perchlorate discharge test. Recently, this autosomal recessive disorder was shown to be caused by mutations in the PDS gene, which encodes an anion transporter called pendrin. Molecular analysis of the PDS gene was performed in two consanguineous large families from Southern Tunisia comprising a total of 23 individuals affected with profound congenital deafness; the same missense mutation, L445W, was identified in all affected individuals. A widened vestibular aqueduct was found in all patients who underwent computed tomography (CT) scan exploration of the inner ear. In contrast, goiter was present in only 11 affected individuals, who interestingly had a normal result of the perchlorate discharge test whenever performed. The present results question the sensitivity of the perchlorate test for the diagnosis of Pendred syndrome and support the use of a molecular analysis of the PDS gene in the assessment of individuals with severe to profound congenital hearing loss associated with inner ear morphological anomaly even in the absence of a thyroid goiter.. 

inner ear morphological anomaly
Non-syndromic hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibular aqueduct is caused by PDS mutations.
Enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), known as the most common form of inner ear abnormality, has recently been of particular genetic interest because this anomaly is inherited in a recessive manner. The locus for non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss with EVA has been mapped to the same chromosomal region, 7q31, as the Pendred syndrome locus. In the present study, seven mutations in the PDS gene (PDS), the gene responsible for Pendred syndrome, have been found in families of non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss with EVA. One family is homozygous, three families are compound heterozygotes, and two families are heterozygous but with no other mutation detected. The present results provide evidence that mutations in PDS cause both syndromic and non-syndromic hearing loss.. 

inner ear abnormality