MEFV-Gene analysis in armenian patients with Familial Mediterranean fever: diagnostic value and unfavorable renal prognosis of the M694V homozygous genotype-genetic and therapeutic implications.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessively inherited disorder that is common in patients of Armenian ancestry. To date, its diagnosis, which can be made only retrospectively, is one of exclusion, based entirely on nonspecific clinical signs that result from serosal inflammation and that may lead to unnecessary surgery. Renal amyloidosis, prevented by colchicine, is the most severe complication of FMF, a disorder associated with mutations in the MEFV gene. To evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic value of MEFV-gene analysis, we investigated 90 Armenian FMF patients from 77 unrelated families that were not selected through genetic-linkage analysis. Eight mutations, one of which (R408Q) is new, were found to account for 93% of the 163 independent FMF alleles, with both FMF alleles identified in 89% of the patients. In several instances, family studies provided molecular evidence for pseudodominant transmission and incomplete penetrance of the disease phenotype. The M694V homozygous genotype was found to be associated with a higher prevalence of renal amyloidosis and arthritis, compared with other genotypes (P =. 0002 and P =. 006, respectively). The demonstration of both the diagnostic and prognostic value of MEFV analysis and particular modes of inheritance should lead to new ways for management of FMF-including genetic counseling and therapeutic decisions in affected families.

serosal inflammation
Family studies in Bechterew's syndrome (ankylosing spondylitis) III. Genetics.
The results of segregation analyses in 75 families where the proband had ankylosing spondylitis, are presented. Of the 278 adult, living first degree relatives, approximately 85% cooperated in the study. Clinical and radiographical examinations were performed and HLA typing was conducted. The results were in agreement with our hypothesis that ankylosing spondylitis is part of a syndrome where different genetic factors interact. Such known factors are HLA B27 associated disease susceptibility, susceptibility to psoriatic arthropathy and susceptibility to entero-arthropathy. Radiographical sacro-iliitis was restricted to HLA B27 positive relatives, and was more frequently found in relatives to probands with psoriasis than in relatives to probands without psoriasis. Environmental factors (intestinal bacteria) are known to trigger the disease at least in some persons, and we have postulated that all or most of them have the predisposition to develop disease. Thus, the syndrome has a multifactorial etiology. The phenotypic expressions of the different genetic predispositions involved, include sacro-iliitis, psoriasis, acute anterior uveitis, peripheral arthropathy and inflammatory bowel disease. We suggest the descriptive name HEREDITARY MULTIFOCAL RELAPSING INFLAMMATION (HEMRI) for this syndrome. Ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy and entero-arthropathy may be regarded as clinical sub-types of the syndrome.. 

HEREDITARY MULTIFOCAL RELAPSING INFLAMMATION
HEMRI
The gene for familial Mediterranean fever, MEFV, is expressed in early leukocyte development and is regulated in response to inflammatory mediators.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessive disorder characterized by episodes of fever and neutrophil-mediated serosal inflammation. We recently identified the gene causing FMF, designated MEFV, and found it to be expressed in mature neutrophils, suggesting that it functions as an inflammatory regulator. To facilitate our understanding of the normal function of MEFV, we extended our previous studies. MEFV messenger RNA was detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in bone marrow leukocytes, with differential expression observed among cells by in situ hybridization. CD34 hematopoietic stem-cell cultures induced toward the granulocytic lineage expressed MEFV at the myelocyte stage, concurrently with lineage commitment. The prepromyelocytic cell line HL60 expressed MEFV only at granulocytic and monocytic differentiation. MEFV was also expressed in the monocytic cell lines U937 and THP-1. Among peripheral blood leukocytes, MEFV expression was detected in neutrophils, eosinophils, and to varying degrees, monocytes. Consistent with the tissue specificity of expression, complete sequencing and analysis of upstream regulatory regions of MEFV revealed homology to myeloid-specific promoters and to more broadly expressed inflammatory promoter elements. In vitro stimulation of monocytes with the proinflammatory agents interferon (IFN) gamma, tumor necrosis factor, and lipopolysaccharide induced MEFV expression, whereas the antiinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL) 4, IL-10, and transforming growth factor beta inhibited such expression. Induction by IFN-gamma occurred rapidly and was resistant to cycloheximide. IFN-alpha also induced MEFV expression. In granulocytes, MEFV was up-regulated by IFN-gamma and the combination of IFN-alpha and colchicine. These results refine understanding of MEFV by placing the gene in the myelomonocytic-specific proinflammatory pathway and identifying it as an IFN-gamma immediate early gene.. 

neutrophil-mediated serosal inflammation
Transgenic mice expressing a truncated form of the high mobility group I-C protein develop adiposity and an abnormally high prevalence of lipomas.
Chromosomal translocations in human lipomas frequently create fusion transcripts encoding high mobility group (HMG) I-C DNA-binding domains and C-terminal sequences from different presumed transcription factors, suggesting a potential role for HMG I-C in the development of lipomas. To evaluate the role of the HMG I-C component, the three DNA-binding domains of HMG I-C have now been expressed in transgenic mice. Despite the ubiquitous expression of the truncated HMG I-C protein, the transgenic mice develop a selective abundance of fat tissue early in life, show marked adipose tissue inflammation, and have an abnormally high incidence of lipomas. These findings demonstrate that the DNA-binding domains of HMG I-C, in the absence of a C-terminal fusion partner, are sufficient to perturb adipogenesis and predispose to lipomas. We provide data supporting the central utility of this animal model as a tool to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of one of the most common kind of human benign tumors.. 

adipose tissue inflammation