Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome  with defective Fas: genotype influences penetrance.
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a disorder of lymphocyte homeostasis and immunological tolerance. Most patients have a heterozygous mutation in the APT1 gene, which encodes Fas (CD95, APO-1), mediator of an apoptotic pathway crucial to lymphocyte homeostasis. Of 17 unique APT1 mutations in unrelated ALPS probands, 12 (71%) occurred in exons 7-9, which encode the intracellular portion of Fas. In vitro, activated lymphocytes from all 17 patients showed apoptotic defects when exposed to an anti-Fas agonist monoclonal antibody. Similar defects were found in a Fas-negative cell line transfected with cDNAs bearing each of the mutations. In cotransfection experiments, Fas constructs with either intra- or extracellular mutations caused dominant inhibition of apoptosis mediated by wild-type Fas. Two missense Fas variants, not restricted to patients with ALPS, were identified. Variant A (-1) T at the Fas signal-sequence cleavage site, which mediates apoptosis less well than wild-type Fas and is partially inhibitory, was present in 13% of African American alleles. Among the ALPS-associated Fas mutants, dominant inhibition of apoptosis was much more pronounced in mutants affecting the intracellular, versus extracellular, portion of the Fas receptor. Mutations causing disruption of the intracellular Fas death domain also showed a higher penetrance of ALPS phenotype features in mutation-bearing relatives. Significant ALPS-related morbidity occurred in 44% of relatives with intracellular mutations, versus 0% of relatives with extracellular mutations. Thus, the location of mutations within APT1 strongly influences the development and the severity of ALPS.

disorder of lymphocyte homeostasis and immunological tolerance
Atm and Bax cooperate in ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis in the central nervous system.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a hereditary multisystemic disease resulting from mutations of ataxia telangiectasia, mutated (ATM) and is characterized by neurodegeneration, cancer, immune defects, and hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation. The molecular details of ATM function in the nervous system are unclear, although the neurological lesion in ataxia-telangiectasia becomes apparent early in life, suggesting a developmental origin. The central nervous system (CNS) of Atm-null mice shows a pronounced defect in apoptosis induced by genotoxic stress, suggesting ATM functions to eliminate neurons with excessive genomic damage. Here, we report that the death effector Bax is required for a large proportion of Atm-dependent apoptosis in the developing CNS after ionizing radiation (IR). Although many of the same regions of the CNS in both Bax-/- and Atm-/- mice were radioresistant, mice nullizygous for both Bax and Atm showed additional reduction in IR-induced apoptosis in the CNS. Therefore, although the major IR-induced apoptotic pathway in the CNS requires Atm and Bax, a p53-dependent collateral pathway exists that has both Atm- and Bax-independent branches. Further, Atm- and Bax-dependent apoptosis in the CNS also required caspase-3 activation. These data implicate Bax and caspase-3 as death effectors in neurodegenerative pathways.. 

immune defects
X linked recessive thrombocytopenia.
A Saudi Arab boy presented in early childhood with thrombocytopenia, morphologically large and normal sized platelets, increased mean platelet volume, and a hypermegakaryocytic bone marrow. There was no clinical and laboratory evidence of any significant immunological abnormalities. Similar findings in two other brothers suggested strongly that they were all suffering from an X linked recessive thrombocytopenic disorder. Results of DNA analysis with the probe M27 beta are consistent with X linkage and indicate also that the locus of the relevant gene lies close to or is identical to the locus of the gene for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS). Because of various features which include the presence of large and normal sized platelets (rather than small platelets) and freedom from significant immune deficiencies, it is likely that the X linked recessive thrombocytopenia in this family is an isolated entity quite distinct from the classical WAS phenotype. However, a modified expression of the WAS gene producing a mild phenotypic variant cannot be excluded entirely.. 

immunological abnormalities
immune deficiencies
Abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes in Atm mutant mice.
Motor incoordination, immune deficiencies, and an increased risk of cancer are the characteristic features of the hereditary disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Through gene targeting, we have generated a line of Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice. In contrast to other Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice show a lower incidence of thymic lymphoma and survive beyond a few months of age. Atm (y/y) mice exhibit deficits in motor learning indicative of cerebellar dysfunction. Even though we found no gross cerebellar degeneration in older Atm (y/y) animals, ectopic and abnormally differentiated Purkinje cells were apparent in mutant mice of all ages. These findings establish that some neuropathological abnormalities seen in A-T patients also are present in Atm mutant mice. In addition, we report a previously unrecognized effect of Atm deficiency on development or maintenance of CD4 (+) 8 (+) thymocytes. We discuss these findings in the context of the hypothesis that abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes contributes to the pathogenesis of A-T.. 

immune deficiencies