The human gene for alkaptonuria (AKU) maps to chromosome 3q.
Alkaptonuria (AKU; McKusick no. 203500) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by the lack of homogentisic acid oxidase activity. Patients excrete large amounts of homogentisic acid in their urine and a black ochronotic pigment is deposited in their cartilage and collagenous tissues. Ochronosis is the predominant clinical complication of the disease leading to ochronotic arthropathy, dark urine, pigment changes of the skin, and other clinical features. A mutation causing alkaptonuria in the mouse has mapped to chromosome 16. Considering conserved synteny, we were able to map the human gene to chromosome 3q in six alkaptonuria pedigrees of Slovak origin.. 

ochronotic arthropathy
Family studies in Bechterew's syndrome (ankylosing spondylitis) III. Genetics.
The results of segregation analyses in 75 families where the proband had ankylosing spondylitis, are presented. Of the 278 adult, living first degree relatives, approximately 85% cooperated in the study. Clinical and radiographical examinations were performed and HLA typing was conducted. The results were in agreement with our hypothesis that ankylosing spondylitis is part of a syndrome where different genetic factors interact. Such known factors are HLA B27 associated disease susceptibility, susceptibility to psoriatic arthropathy and susceptibility to entero-arthropathy. Radiographical sacro-iliitis was restricted to HLA B27 positive relatives, and was more frequently found in relatives to probands with psoriasis than in relatives to probands without psoriasis. Environmental factors (intestinal bacteria) are known to trigger the disease at least in some persons, and we have postulated that all or most of them have the predisposition to develop disease. Thus, the syndrome has a multifactorial etiology. The phenotypic expressions of the different genetic predispositions involved, include sacro-iliitis, psoriasis, acute anterior uveitis, peripheral arthropathy and inflammatory bowel disease. We suggest the descriptive name HEREDITARY MULTIFOCAL RELAPSING INFLAMMATION (HEMRI) for this syndrome. Ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy and entero-arthropathy may be regarded as clinical sub-types of the syndrome.. 

arthropathy
entero-arthropathy