Molecular and metabolic basis for the metabolic disorder normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia.
We have previously described a disorder, normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia, that is characterized by the virtual absence of plasma low density lipoproteins and complete absence of apoB-100, but with apparently normal secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins containing apoB-48. The patients plasma lipoproteins were shown on polyacrylamide gels and by antibody mapping to have a new truncated apoB variant, apoB-50, circulating along with her apoB-48. We have found this individual to be homozygous for a single C-to-T nucleotide substitution at apoB codon 2252, which produces a premature in-frame stop codon. Thus, this is a rare example of homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia. Electron photomicrographs revealed that the diameters of particles in the d less than 1. 006 g/ml lipoprotein fraction, in both the postprandial and postabsorptive state, are bimodally distributed. The molar ratio of apoE to apoB in these particles is 3. 5  1, similar to normal VLDL. The plasma LDL interval contains both spherical and cuboidal particles. Autologous reinfusion of labeled d less than 1. 006 g/ml lipoproteins showed exponential disappearance from plasma, with an apparent half-removal time of 50 min, somewhat slower than for normal chylomicrons but within the normal range for VLDL. The calculated production rate for apoB was within the normal range in this subject. 

metabolic disorder
A single origin of phenylketonuria in Yemenite Jews.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a metabolic disease caused by recessive mutations of the gene encoding the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The incidence of PKU varies widely across different geographic areas, and is highest (about 1 in 5, 000 live births) in Ireland and western Scotland, and among Yemenite Jews. A limited number of point mutations account for most of the PKU cases in the European population. Here we report that a single molecular defect--a deletion spanning the third exon of the PAH gene--is responsible for all the PKU cases among the Yemenite Jews. Examination of a random sample of Yemenite Jews using a molecular probe that detects the carriers of this deletion indicated a high frequency of the defective gene in this community. Although the deleted PAH gene was traced to 25 different locations throughout Yemen, family histories and official documents of the Yemenite Jewish community showed that the common ancestor of all the carriers of this genetic defect lived in Sana, the capital of Yemen, before the eighteenth century.. 

metabolic disease
Increased incidence of cataracts in male subjects deficient in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in RBCs was found significantly more frequently in 210 male cataractous patients than in 672 control subjects of Sardinian origin. The frequency of the deficiency was increasingly higher in presenile cataracts. In the G6PD-deficient group, the incidence of cortical and total cataracts was also increased. It is suggested that decrease of the G6PD activity in the lens, which accompanies its deficiency in the erythrocyte, might play a role in the cataracto-genesis of these patients. Moreover, G6PD deficiency should be added to other conditions, such as the galactosemic states and riboflavin deficiency, where cataracts represent a sensitive indicator of metabolic abnormalities of the RBC.. 

metabolic abnormalities