New genetic variants of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in Italy.
Six new variants of human erythrocyte G6PD have been characterized. All of them were found in Italian males and all were associated with enzyme deficiency, but only two with signs of haemolysis. These and other variants reported in the literature, which must thus far be regarded as sporadic, are found to map in parts of Italy where common types of G6PD deficiency are also prevalent.. 

enzyme deficiency
Diverse point mutations in the human glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase gene cause enzyme deficiency and mild or severe hemolytic anemia.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD; EC 1. 1. 1. 49) deficiency is a common genetic abnormality affecting an estimated 400 million people worldwide. Clinical and biochemical analyses have identified many variants exhibiting a range of phenotypes, which have been well characterized from the hematological point of view. However, until now, their precise molecular basis has remained unknown. We have cloned and sequenced seven mutant G6PD alleles. In the nondeficient polymorphic African variant G6PD A we have found a single point mutation. The other six mutants investigated were all associated with enzyme deficiency. In one of the commonest, G6PD Mediterranean, which is associated with favism among other clinical manifestations, a single amino acid replacement was found (serine----phenylalanine)  it must be responsible for the decreased stability and the reduced catalytic efficiency of this enzyme. Single point mutations were also found in G6PD Metaponto (Southern Italy) and in G6PD Ilesha (Nigeria), which are asymptomatic, and in G6PD Chatham, which was observed in an Indian boy with neonatal jaundice. In G6PD " Matera, " which is now known to be the same as G6PD A-, two separate point mutations were found, one of which is the same as in G6PD A. In G6PD Santiago, a de novo mutation (glycine----arginine) is associated with severe chronic hemolytic anemia. The mutations observed show a striking predominance of C----T transitions, with CG doublets involved in four of seven cases. Thus, diverse point mutations may account largely for the phenotypic heterogeneity of G6PD deficiency. 

enzyme deficiency
enzyme deficiency
Mutational analysis of the HGO gene in Finnish alkaptonuria patients.
Alkaptonuria (AKU), the prototypic inborn error of metabolism, has recently been shown to be caused by loss of function mutations in the homogentisate-1, 2-dioxygenase gene (HGO). So far 17 mutations have been characterised in AKU patients of different ethnic origin. We describe three novel mutations (R58fs, R330S, and H371R) and one common AKU mutation (M368V), detected by mutational and polymorphism analysis of the HGO gene in five Finnish AKU pedigrees. The three novel AKU mutations are most likely specific for the Finnish population and have originated recently.. 

inborn error of metabolism
Natural selection of hemi- and heterozygotes for G6PD deficiency in Africa by resistance to severe malaria.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, the most common enzymopathy of humans, affects over 400 million people. The geographical correlation of its distribution with the historical endemicity of malaria suggests that this disorder has risen in frequency through natural selection by malaria. However, attempts to confirm that G6PD deficiency is protective in case-control studies of malaria have yielded conflicting results. Hence, for this X-linked disorder, it is unclear whether both male hemizygotes and female heterozygotes are protected or, as frequently suggested, only females. Furthermore, how much protection may be afforded is unknown. Here we report that, in two large case-control studies of over 2, 000 African children, the common African form of G6PD deficiency (G6PD A-) is associated with a 46-58% reduction in risk of severe malaria for both female heterozygotes and male hemizygotes. A mathematical model incorporating the measured selective advantage against malaria suggests that a counterbalancing selective disadvantage, associated with this enzyme deficiency, has retarded its rise in frequency in malaria-endemic regions. Although G6PD deficiency is now regarded as a generally benign disorder, in earlier environmental conditions it could have been significantly disadvantageous.. 

enzymopathy
enzyme deficiency
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase variants and their frequency in Guangdong, China.
Erythrocyte glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) was characterized in blood samples obtained from 97 randomly selected males with enzyme deficiency from various regions of Guangdong Province, China. Nine new variants (Gd Kaiping, Gd Boluo, Gd Huiyang, Gd Gaomin, Gd Qing-Baijiang, Gd Gaozhou, Gd Huazhou, Gd Nanhai, and Gd Guangzhou) were identified. Of the 31 variants found in this province, Gd Kaiping, Gd Taiwan-Hakka, Gd Haad Yai, Gd Haad Yai-like and Gd Huiyang occurred most frequently. The frequency of each variant was calculated. The results demonstrated that the genetic heterogeneity of G6PD deficiency was high in this area.. 

enzyme deficiency
Identification of the mutation in the alkaptonuria mouse model.
Alkaptonuria (aku), an inborn error of metabolism caused by the loss of homogentisate 1, 2-dioxygenase (HGD), has been described in a mouse model created by ethylnitrosourea mutagenesis but the mutation in these mice has not previously been identified. We used RT-PCR to amplify the Hgd cDNA from Hgd (aku)/Hgd (aku) mice. Two products shorter than the wild-type product were amplified. Restriction mapping and DNA sequencing were then used to identify the Hgd (aku) mouse mutation, found to be a single base change in a splice donor consensus sequence, causing exon skipping and frame-shifted products. This base change allowed us to create a non-radioactive genotyping assay for this allele. 

inborn error of metabolism
Diverse point mutations result in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) polymorphism in Taiwan.
Glucose-6-PHOSPHATE dehydrogenase (G6PD; EC 1.1. 1. 49) deficiency is the most common human enzymopathy, affecting more than 200 million people worldwide. Although greater than 400 variants have been described based on clinical and biochemical criteria, little is known about the molecular basis of these G6PD deficiencies. Recently, the gene that encodes human G6PD has been cloned and sequenced, which enables us to examine directly the heterogeneity of G6PD at the DNA level. During the past 10 years, we examined the G6PD activity in 21, 271 newborn Chinese infants (11, 400 males and 9, 871 females) and identified 314 (2. 8%) males and 246 (2. 5%) females having low G6PD activity. The G6PD gene from 10 randomly selected affected individuals and their relatives was polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified, subcloned, and sequenced. Our results indicate that at least four types of mutation are responsible for the G6PD polymorphism in Taiwan. The first type of mutation (487 G----A) was found in an affected Chinese with a G to A change at nucleotide 487, which results in a (163) Gly to Ser substitution. The second type of mutation (493 A----G) is a novel mutation that has not been reported in any other ethnic group and was identified in two affected Chinese. This mutation causes an A to G change at nucleotide position 493, producing an (165) Asn to Asp substitution. Interestingly, the 487 G----A and 493 A----G mutations create Alu I and Ava II recognition sites, respectively, which enabled us to rapidly detect these two mutations by PCR/restriction enzyme (RE) digestion method. The third mutation (1376 G----T) was found in four affected Chinese. This mutation causes a G to T change at nucleotide position 1376 that results in an (459) Arg to Leu substitution. The 1376 G----T mutation seems to be the dominant allele that causes G6PD deficiency in Taiwan. Finally, two affected Chinese were identified as having the fourth mutation (1388 G----A). This mutation causes a G to A change at nucleotide 1388 that produces an (463) Arg to His substitution. Our studies provide the direct proof of the genetic heterogeneity of G6PD deficiency in the Chinese populations of Taiwan and the PCR/RE digestion method is suitable for simultaneous detection of the 487 G----A and 493 A----G mutations.

enzymopathy
Identification of mutations in the ALD-gene of 20 families with adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), an X-linked inherited metabolic disorder, is the most frequent inborn peroxisomal disease. It leads to demyelination in the central and peripheral nervous system. Defective beta-oxidation of saturated very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs; C22  0-C26  0) in peroxisomes has been shown to lead to an accumulation of VLCFAs in leukoid areas of the central nervous system, peripheral nerves, adrenal gland, and blood. The ALD gene has been recently identified and encodes a 745-amino-acid protein. We screened patients with adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy (ALD/AMN) from 20 kindreds for mutations in the ALD gene. Eleven missense and two nonsense mutations, five deletions, and one insertion were detected by direct sequencing of eight reverse transcribed fragments of the ALD-gene mRNA. Four mutations could be shown to be de novo. All mutations could be confirmed in carriers by sequencing genomic DNA. No correlation between the type of mutation and the severity of the phenotype could be observed. The mutations were not detected in the ALD gene of 30 healthy persons.. 

X-linked inherited metabolic disorder
Human glycine decarboxylase gene (GLDC) and its highly conserved processed pseudogene (psiGLDC): their structure and expression, and the identification of a large deletion in a family with nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
Mutations in the glycine decarboxylase gene (GLDC) cause nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH), an in-born error of metabolism characterized by severe neurological disturbance. We have determined the structure of GLDC and of its pseudogene (psiGLDC) and studied their expression for a molecular analysis of NKH. The GLDC gene spans at least 135 kb and consists of 25 exons. All donor and acceptor sites adhere to the canonical GT-AG rule, except for the donor site of intron 21, where a variant form GC is used instead of GT. The transcription initiation site has been assigned to a residue 163 bp upstream from the translation initiation triplet by primer extension analysis. The psiGLDC gene has no intron and shares 97. 5% homology with the coding region of functional GLDC, suggesting that psiGLDC is a processed pseudogene that arose from the GLDC transcript about 4-8 million years ago. RNA blotting analysis has revealed that GLDC is expressed in human liver, kidney, brain, and placenta. We have also examined a patient with NKH with no detectable GLDC mRNA in his lymphoblasts. Exons 1-3 of the functional GLDC gene from this patient are not amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), whereas those from control subjects are. These results suggest a large homozygous deletion (at least 30 kb) in the patient. Furthermore, we have devised a semi-quantitative PCR to estimate the number of GLDC alleles by using psiGLDC as an internal control and have confirmed the homozygosity and heterozygosity of the deletion in the patient and his parents, respectively. Structural information of GLDC and psiGLDC should facilitate the molecular analysis of NKH. 

in-born error of metabolism
Molecular basis of essential fructosuria: molecular cloning and mutational analysis of human ketohexokinase (fructokinase).
Essential fructosuria is one of the oldest known inborn errors of metabolism. It is a benign condition which is believed to result from deficiency of hepatic fructokinase (ketohexokinase, KHK, E. C. 2. 7. 1. 3). This enzyme catalyses the first step of metabolism of dietary fructose, conversion of fructose to fructose-1-phosphate. Despite the early recognition of this disorder, the primary structure of human KHK and the molecular basis of essential fructosuria have not been previously defined. In this report, the isolation and sequencing of full-length cDNA clones encoding human ketohexokinase are described. Alternative mRNA species and alternative KHK isozymes are produced by alternative polyadenylation and splicing of the KHK gene. The KHK proteins show a high level of sequence conservation relative to rat KHK. Direct evidence that mutation of the KHK structural gene is the cause of essential fructosuria was also obtained. In a well-characterized family, in which three of eight siblings have fructosuria, all affected individuals are compound heterozygotes for two mutations Gly40Arg and Ala43Thr. Both mutations result from G-- > A transitions, and each alters the same conserved region of the KHK protein. Neither mutation was seen in a sample of 52 unrelated control individuals. An additional conservative amino acid change (Val49IIe) was present on the KHK allele bearing Ala43Thr 

inborn errors of metabolism
Molecular genetics of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) Mediterranean variant and description of a new G6PD mutant, G6PD Andalus1361A.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD; E. C. 1. 1. 1. 49) deficiency is the most common human enzymopathy; more than 300 different biochemical variants of the enzyme have been described. In many parts of the world the Mediterranean type of G6PD deficiency is prevalent. However, G6PD Mediterranean has come to be regarded as a generic term applied to similar G6PD mutations thought, however, to represent a somewhat heterogeneous group. A C----T mutation at nucleotide 563 of G6PD Mediterranean has been identified by Vulliamy et al., and the same mutation has been found by De Vita et al. in G6PD Mediterranean, G6PD Sassari, and G6PD Cagliari. The latter subjects had an additional mutation, at nucleotide 1311, that did not produce a coding change. We have examined genomic DNA of five patients--four of Spanish origin and one of Jewish origin--having enzymatically documented G6PD Mediterranean. All had both the mutation at nucleotide 563 and that at nucleotide 1311. A sixth sample, resembling G6PD Mediterranean kinetically but with a slightly rapid electrophoretic mobility, was designated G6PD Andalus and was found to have a different mutation, a G----A transition at nucleotide 1361, producing an arginine-to-histidine substitution. These studies suggest that G6PD Mediterranean is, after all, relatively homogeneous.

enzymopathy
Human peroxisomal targeting signal-1 receptor restores peroxisomal protein import in cells from patients with fatal peroxisomal disorders.
Two peroxisomal targeting signals, PTS1 and PTS2, are involved in the import of proteins into the peroxisome matrix. Human patients with fatal generalized peroxisomal deficiency disorders fall into at least nine genetic complementation groups. Cells from many of these patients are deficient in the import of PTS1-containing proteins, but the causes of the protein-import defect in these patients are unknown. We have cloned and sequenced the human cDNA homologue (PTS1R) of the Pichia pastoris PAS8 gene, the PTS1 receptor (McCollum, D., E. Monosov, and S. Subramani. 1993. J. Cell Biol. 121  761-774). The PTS1R mRNA is expressed in all human tissues examined. Antibodies to the human PTS1R recognize this protein in human, monkey, rat, and hamster cells. The protein is localized mainly in the cytosol but is also found to be associated with peroxisomes. Part of the peroxisomal PTS1R protein is tightly bound to the peroxisomal membrane. Antibodies to PTS1R inhibit peroxisomal protein-import of PTS1-containing proteins in a permeabilized CHO cell system. In vitro-translated PTS1R protein specifically binds a serine-lysine-leucine-peptide. A PAS8-PTS1R fusion protein complements the P. pastoris pas8 mutant. The PTS1R cDNA also complements the PTS1 protein-import defect in skin fibroblasts from patients--belonging to complementation group two--diagnosed as having neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy or Zellweger syndrome. The PTS1R gene has been localized to a chromosomal location where no other peroxisomal disorder genes are known to map. Our findings represent the only case in which the molecular basis of the protein-import deficiency in human peroxisomal disorders is understood. 

protein-import deficiency