PRAD1, a candidate BCL1 oncogene: mapping and expression in centrocytic lymphoma.
Rearrangement of the BCL1 (B-cell lymphoma 1) region on chromosome 11q13 appears to be highly characteristic of centrocytic lymphoma and also is found infrequently in other B-cell neoplasms. Rearrangement is thought to deregulate a nearby protooncogene, but transcribed sequences in the immediate vicinity of BCL1 breakpoints had not been identified. PRAD1, previously designated D11S287E, was identified on 11q13 as a chromosomal breakpoint region rearranged with the parathyroid hormone gene in a subset of parathyroid adenomas; this highly conserved putative oncogene, which encodes a novel cyclin, has been linked to BCL1 and implicated also in subsets of breast and squamous cell neoplasms with 11q13 amplification. We report pulsed-field gel electrophoresis data showing BCL1 and PRAD1 to be no more than 130 kilobases apart. PRAD1 mRNA is abundantly expressed in seven of seven centrocytic lymphomas (Kiel classification), in contrast to 13 closely related but noncentrocytic lymphomas. Three of the seven centrocytic lymphomas had detectable BCL1 DNA rearrangement. Also, two unusual cases of CLL with BCL1 rearrangement overexpressed PRAD1, in contrast to five CLL controls. Thus, PRAD1 is an excellent candidate " BCL1 oncogene. " Its overexpression may be a key consequence of rearrangement of the BCL1 vicinity in B-cell neoplasms and a unifying pathogenetic feature in centrocytic lymphoma. 

centrocytic lymphoma
centrocytic lymphoma
centrocytic lymphomas
noncentrocytic lymphomas
centrocytic lymphomas
centrocytic lymphoma
Somatic rearrangement of chromosome 14 in human lymphocytes.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare genetic disorder associated with immune deficiency, chromosome instability, and a predisposition to lymphoid malignancy. We have detected chromosomally anomalous clones of lymphocytes in eight patients with this disorder. Chromosome banding disclosed that the clones are consistently marked by structural rearrangement of the long arm (q) of chromosome 14. A translocation involving 14q was found in clones obtained from seven of the eight patients whereas a ring 14 chromosome was found in a clone obtained from the other. These findings as well as data obtained by others for patients with ataxia-telangiectasia suggest that structural rearrangement of 14q is the initial chromosomal change in lymphocyte clones of patients with this disorder. Chromosomes of lymphocytes from one of the patients were studied before and after the onset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Before leukemia was diagnosed, the patient had a lymphocyte clone with a 14q translocation. This clone appears to have given rise to the leukemic cells. We hypothesize that structural rearrangement of 14q is directly related to abnormal growth of lymphocytes and that it may be a step toward the development of lymphoid malignancies. Increasing evidence, provided by others, for the nonrandom involvement of 14q in African-type Burkitts lymphoma and other lymphoid neoplasms further strengthens this hypothesis.. 

lymphoid malignancy
lymphoid malignancies
lymphoid neoplasms
Malignant neoplasms in the families of patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive syndrome associated with a greatly increased incidence of malignant neoplasms in homozygous affected individuals. Heterozygotes for the gene for A-T are thought to comprise about 1% of the general population and, therefore, it is important to know whether this gene also predisposes the heterozygous carrier to cancers. Heterozygous carriers of this gene are common among the close relatives of patients with A-T, although individual carriers cannot be identified by any clinical criterion or laboratory test. For this reason, we compared the incidence of death from malignant neoplasms in 2 families of patients with A-T to that expected in a random sample of the general population. There were 59 deaths from malignant neoplasms in relatives dying before age 75, compared to 42. 6 expected (p less than 0. 02). For A-T heterozygotes younger than age 45, the risk of dying from a malignant neoplasm was estimated to be greater than 5 times the risk for the general population. A-T heterozygotes may comprise more than 5% of all persons dying from a cancer before age 45. The incidence of ovarian, gastric, and biliary system carcinomas and of leukemia and lymphoma was increased in these A-T families. Other neoplasms that may be associated with this gene in heterozygotes include pancreatic, basal cell, colonic, breast, and cervical carcinomas.

lymphoma