A population-based study of the clinical expression of the hemochromatosis gene.
BACKGROUND AND METHODS  Hereditary hemochromatosis is associated with homozygosity for the C282Y mutation in the hemochromatosis (HFE) gene on chromosome 6, elevated serum transferrin saturation, and excess iron deposits throughout the body. To assess the prevalence and clinical expression of the HFE gene, we conducted a population-based study in Busselton, Australia. In 1994, we obtained blood samples for the determination of serum transferrin saturation and ferritin levels and the presence or absence of the C282Y mutation and the H63D mutation (which may contribute to increased hepatic iron levels) in 3011 unrelated white adults. We evaluated all subjects who had persistently elevated transferrin-saturation values (45 percent or higher) or were homozygous for the C282Y mutation. We recommended liver biopsy for subjects with serum ferritin levels of 300 ng per milliliter or higher. The subjects were followed for up to four years. RESULTS  Sixteen of the subjects (0. 5 percent) were homozygous for the C282Y mutation, and 424 (14. 1 percent) were heterozygous. The serum transferrin saturation was 45 percent or higher in 15 of the 16 who were homozygous; in 1 subject it was 43 percent. Four of the homozygous subjects had previously been given a diagnosis of hemochromatosis, and 12 had not. Seven of these 12 patients had elevated serum ferritin levels in 1994; 6 of the 7 had further increases in 1998, and 1 had a decrease, although the value remained elevated. The serum ferritin levels in the four other homozygous patients remained in the normal range. Eleven of the 16 homozygous subjects underwent liver biopsy; 3 had hepatic fibrosis, and 1, who had a history of excessive alcohol consumption, had cirrhosis and mild microvesicular steatosis. Eight of the 16 homozygous subjects had clinical findings that were consistent with the presence of hereditary hemochromatosis, such as hepatomegaly, skin pigmentation, and arthritis. CONCLUSIONS  In a population of white adults of northern European ancestry, 0. 5 percent were homozygous for the C282Y mutation in the HFE gene. However, only half of those who were homozygous had clinical features of hemochromatosis, and one quarter had serum ferritin levels that remained normal over a four-year period.

hepatic fibrosis
cirrhosis
Null mutation of the murine ATP7B (Wilson disease) gene results in intracellular copper accumulation and late-onset hepatic nodular transformation.
The Atp7b protein is a copper-transporting ATPase expressed predominantly in the liver and to a lesser extent in most other tissues. Mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to Wilson disease, a copper toxicity disorder characterized by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent hepatic and neuro-logical abnormalities. Using homologous recombination to disrupt the normal translation of ATP7B, we have generated a strain of mice that are homozygous mutants (null) for the Wilson disease gene. The ATP7B null mice display a gradual accumulation of hepatic copper that increases to a level 60-fold greater than normal by 5 months of age. An increase in copper concentration was also observed in the kidney, brain, placenta and lactating mammary glands of homo-zygous mutants, although milk from the mutant glands was copper deficient. Morphological abnormalities resembling cirrhosis developed in the majority of the livers from homozygous mutants older than 7 months of age. Progeny of the homozygous mutant females demonstrated neurological abnormalities and growth retardation characteristic of copper deficiency. Copper concentration in the livers of the newborn homozygous null mutants was decreased dramatically. In summary, inactivation of the murine ATP7B gene produces a form of cirrhotic liver disease that resembles Wilson disease in humans and the toxic milk phenotype in the mouse.. 

cirrhosis
cirrhotic liver disease