Mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
BACKGROUND  X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an inherited disease characterized by progressive neurologic dysfunction, occasionally associated with adrenal insufficiency. The classic form of ALD usually has onset in childhood (childhood cerebral ALD), with rapid neurologic deterioration leading to a vegetative state. Adult-onset cerebral ALD also presents with rapidly progressive neurologic dysfunction. Milder phenotypes such as adrenomyeloneuropathy and Addison disease only also have been recognized. Despite discovery of the causative gene, a molecular basis for the diverse clinical presentations remains to be elucidated. OBJECTIVES  To conduct mutational analyses in 29 Japanese patients with ALD from 29 unrelated families, to obtain knowledge of the spectrum of mutations in this gene, and to study genotype-phenotype correlations in Japanese patients. METHODS  The 29 patients comprised 13 patients with childhood cerebral ALD, 11 patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD, and 5 patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy. We conducted detailed mutational analyses of 29 unrelated Japanese patients with ALD by genomic Southern blot analysis and direct nucleotide sequence analysis of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction products derived from total RNA that was extracted from cultured skin fibroblasts, lymphoblastoid cells, or peripheral blood leukocytes. RESULTS  Three patients with adult-onset cerebral ALD were identified as having large genomic rearrangements. The remaining 26 patients were identified as having 21 independent mutations, including 12 novel mutations resulting in small nucleotide alterations in the ALD gene. Eighteen (69%) of 26 mutations were missense mutations. Most missense mutations involved amino acids conserved in homologous gene products, including PMP70, mALDRP, and Pxa1p. The AG dinucleotide deletion at position 1081-1082, which has been reported previously to be the most common mutation in white patients (12% -17%), was also identified as the most common mutation in Japanese patients (12%). All phenotypes were associated with mutations resulting in protein truncation or subtle amino acid changes. There were no differences in phenotypic expressions between missense mutations involving conserved amino acids and those involving nonconserved amino acids. CONCLUSIONS  There are no obvious correlations between the phenotypes of patients with ALD and their genotypes, suggesting that other genetic or environmental factors modify the phenotypic expressions of ALD.. 

neurologic dysfunction
neurologic deterioration
neurologic dysfunction
Ataxin-3 with an altered conformation that exposes the polyglutamine domain is associated with the nuclear matrix.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type-3 or Machado-Joseph disease (SCA3/MJD) is a member of the CAG/polyglutamine repeat disease family. In this family of disorders, a normally polymorphic CAG repeat becomes expanded, resulting in expression of an expanded polyglutamine domain in the disease gene product. Experimental models of polyglutamine disease implicate the nucleus in pathogenesis; however, the link between intranuclear expression of expanded polyglutamine and neuronal dysfunction remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that ataxin-3, the disease protein in SCA3/MJD, adopts a unique conformation when expressed within the nucleus of transfected cells. The monoclonal antibody 1C2 is known preferentially to bind expanded polyglutamine, but we find that it also binds a fragment of ataxin-3 containing a normal glutamine repeat. In addition, expression of ataxin-3 within the nucleus exposes the glutamine domain of the full-length non-pathological protein, allowing it to bind the monoclonal antibody 1C2. Fractionation and immunochemical experiments indicate that this novel conformation of intranuclear ataxin-3 is not due to proteolysis, suggesting instead that association with nuclear protein (s) alters the structure of full-length ataxin-3 which exposes the polyglutamine domain. This conformationally altered ataxin-3 is bound to the nuclear matrix. The pathological form of ataxin-3 with an expanded polyglutamine domain also associates with the nuclear matrix. These data suggest that an early event in the pathogenesis of SCA3/MJD may be an altered conformation of ataxin-3 within the nucleus that exposes the polyglutamine domain.. 

neuronal dysfunction
Null mutation of the murine ATP7B (Wilson disease) gene results in intracellular copper accumulation and late-onset hepatic nodular transformation.
The Atp7b protein is a copper-transporting ATPase expressed predominantly in the liver and to a lesser extent in most other tissues. Mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to Wilson disease, a copper toxicity disorder characterized by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent hepatic and neuro-logical abnormalities. Using homologous recombination to disrupt the normal translation of ATP7B, we have generated a strain of mice that are homozygous mutants (null) for the Wilson disease gene. The ATP7B null mice display a gradual accumulation of hepatic copper that increases to a level 60-fold greater than normal by 5 months of age. An increase in copper concentration was also observed in the kidney, brain, placenta and lactating mammary glands of homo-zygous mutants, although milk from the mutant glands was copper deficient. Morphological abnormalities resembling cirrhosis developed in the majority of the livers from homozygous mutants older than 7 months of age. Progeny of the homozygous mutant females demonstrated neurological abnormalities and growth retardation characteristic of copper deficiency. Copper concentration in the livers of the newborn homozygous null mutants was decreased dramatically. In summary, inactivation of the murine ATP7B gene produces a form of cirrhotic liver disease that resembles Wilson disease in humans and the toxic milk phenotype in the mouse.. 

neurological abnormalities
Study of the voltage-gated sodium channel beta 1 subunit gene (SCN1B) in the benign familial infantile convulsions syndrome (BFIC).
Benign familial infantile convulsions (BFIC) is a rare autosomal dominant epilepsy syndrome. This syndrome has been recently described in Italian and French pedigrees. Patients present with partial, then generalized seizures, with onset at age three months. The seizures usually spontaneously cease after one year without treatment, leaving no neurological abnormalities. We have mapped BFIC to chromosome 19q in five Italian pedigrees. The sodium channel beta1 subunit gene (SCN1B) maps to this candidate region and has been shown to be involved in one Australian pedigree with generalized epilepsy and febrile seizures " plus " (GEFS +). In this family, a missense mutation in SCN1B cosegregates with the GEFS + phenotype. BFIC and GEFS + have clinical features in common, therefore SCN1B is a candidate gene for BFIC. We studied SCN1B exons 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, using four SSCP methods in 10 Caucasian BFIC probands of Western Europe. We found no exon variants. One variant was identified in intron 5 (IVS5-10C > G), which did not segregate with BFIC and was observed in 9. 2% controls. A second variant in intron 5 was identified (IVS5 + 30G > A). It was rare, as not observed in controls, but not segregating with the BFIC phenotype. 

neurological abnormalities
Human glycine decarboxylase gene (GLDC) and its highly conserved processed pseudogene (psiGLDC): their structure and expression, and the identification of a large deletion in a family with nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
Mutations in the glycine decarboxylase gene (GLDC) cause nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH), an in-born error of metabolism characterized by severe neurological disturbance. We have determined the structure of GLDC and of its pseudogene (psiGLDC) and studied their expression for a molecular analysis of NKH. The GLDC gene spans at least 135 kb and consists of 25 exons. All donor and acceptor sites adhere to the canonical GT-AG rule, except for the donor site of intron 21, where a variant form GC is used instead of GT. The transcription initiation site has been assigned to a residue 163 bp upstream from the translation initiation triplet by primer extension analysis. The psiGLDC gene has no intron and shares 97. 5% homology with the coding region of functional GLDC, suggesting that psiGLDC is a processed pseudogene that arose from the GLDC transcript about 4-8 million years ago. RNA blotting analysis has revealed that GLDC is expressed in human liver, kidney, brain, and placenta. We have also examined a patient with NKH with no detectable GLDC mRNA in his lymphoblasts. Exons 1-3 of the functional GLDC gene from this patient are not amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), whereas those from control subjects are. These results suggest a large homozygous deletion (at least 30 kb) in the patient. Furthermore, we have devised a semi-quantitative PCR to estimate the number of GLDC alleles by using psiGLDC as an internal control and have confirmed the homozygosity and heterozygosity of the deletion in the patient and his parents, respectively. Structural information of GLDC and psiGLDC should facilitate the molecular analysis of NKH. 

neurological disturbance