Investigation of thermoregulatory characteristics in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome.
A survey instrument is used to assess temperature regulation characteristics in children with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) compared to 3 control groups  sibs of PWS patients (SIB), neurodevelopmentally handicapped children (ND), and age and gender matched well children (WC). Significant differences were found between PWS patients, SIB controls, and WC controls in the prevalence of febrile convulsions, fever-associated symptoms, and temperature less than 94 degrees F. No differences were noted in any variable between the PWS patients and the ND controls, suggesting that these abnormalities are not unique to PWS, but can occur in any neurodevelopmentally handicapped individual, further suggesting these do not necessarily reflect syndrome-specific hypothalamic abnormalities.. 

neurodevelopmentally handicapped
neurodevelopmentally handicapped
A potential animal model for Lesch-Nyhan syndrome through introduction of HPRT mutations into mice.
The human Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a rare neurological and behavioural disorder, affecting only males, which is caused by an inherited deficiency in the level of activity of the purine salvage enzyme hypoxanthine-guanosine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT). How the resulting alterations in purine metabolism lead to the severe symptoms characteristic of Lesch-Nyhan patients is still not understood. No mutations at the Hprt locus leading to loss of activity have been described in laboratory animals. To derive an animal model for the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, we have used cultured mouse embryonic stem cells, mutagenized by retroviral insertion and selected for loss of HPRT activity, to construct chimaeric mice. Two clonal lines carrying different mutant Hprt alleles have given rise to germ cells in chimaeras, allowing the derivation of strains of mutant mice having the same biochemical defect as Lesch-Nyhan patients. Male mice carrying the mutant alleles are viable and analysis of their cells shows a total lack of HPRT activity.. 

neurological and behavioural disorder
Phenotype heterogeneity among hemizygotes in a family biochemically screened for adrenoleukodystrophy.
We report on two clinically, neurologically normal relatives of a boy affected by adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD); they were found repeatedly to have the biochemical defect of an ALD hemizygote. The assay consisted in the determination of very-long-chain fatty acids in lyophilized and reconstituted plasma. While no evidence of neurologic disease (leukodystrophy or myeloneuropathy) was present in these hemizygotes, adrenocortical insufficiency provoking compensatory high ACTH release was found in both. These findings should be taken into consideration when counseling families in which cases with clinically expressed ALD are represented in several generations.. 

neurologic disease
myeloneuropathy
Null mutation of the murine ATP7B (Wilson disease) gene results in intracellular copper accumulation and late-onset hepatic nodular transformation.
The Atp7b protein is a copper-transporting ATPase expressed predominantly in the liver and to a lesser extent in most other tissues. Mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to Wilson disease, a copper toxicity disorder characterized by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent hepatic and neuro-logical abnormalities. Using homologous recombination to disrupt the normal translation of ATP7B, we have generated a strain of mice that are homozygous mutants (null) for the Wilson disease gene. The ATP7B null mice display a gradual accumulation of hepatic copper that increases to a level 60-fold greater than normal by 5 months of age. An increase in copper concentration was also observed in the kidney, brain, placenta and lactating mammary glands of homo-zygous mutants, although milk from the mutant glands was copper deficient. Morphological abnormalities resembling cirrhosis developed in the majority of the livers from homozygous mutants older than 7 months of age. Progeny of the homozygous mutant females demonstrated neurological abnormalities and growth retardation characteristic of copper deficiency. Copper concentration in the livers of the newborn homozygous null mutants was decreased dramatically. In summary, inactivation of the murine ATP7B gene produces a form of cirrhotic liver disease that resembles Wilson disease in humans and the toxic milk phenotype in the mouse.. 

hepatic and neuro-logical abnormalities
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: an X-linked neurologic disorder of myelin metabolism with a novel mutation in the gene encoding proteolipid protein.
The nosology of the inborn errors of myelin metabolism has been stymied by the lack of molecular genetic analysis. Historically, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease has encompassed a host of neurologic disorders that present with a deficit of myelin, the membrane elaborated by glial cells that encircles and successively enwraps axons. We describe here a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher pedigree of the classical type, with X-linked inheritance, a typical clinical progression, and a pathologic loss of myelinating cells and myelin in the central nervous system. To discriminate variants of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a set of oligonucleotide primers was constructed to polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) amplify and sequence the gene encoding proteolipid protein (PLP), a structural protein that comprises half of the protein of the myelin sheath. The PLP gene in one of two affected males and the carrier mother of this family exhibited a single base difference in the more than 2 kb of the PLP gene sequenced, a C----T transition that would create a serine substitution for proline at the carboxy end of the protein. Our results delineate the clinical features of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, define the possible molecular pathology of this dysmyelinating disorder, and address the molecular classification of inborn errors of myelin metabolism. Patients with the classical form (type I) and the more severely affected, connatal variant of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (type II) would be predicted to display mutation at the PLP locus. The other variants (types III-VI), which have sometimes been categorized as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, may represent mutations in genes encoding other structural myelin proteins or proteins critical to myelination.. 

neurologic disorders
Abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes in Atm mutant mice.
Motor incoordination, immune deficiencies, and an increased risk of cancer are the characteristic features of the hereditary disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Through gene targeting, we have generated a line of Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice. In contrast to other Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice show a lower incidence of thymic lymphoma and survive beyond a few months of age. Atm (y/y) mice exhibit deficits in motor learning indicative of cerebellar dysfunction. Even though we found no gross cerebellar degeneration in older Atm (y/y) animals, ectopic and abnormally differentiated Purkinje cells were apparent in mutant mice of all ages. These findings establish that some neuropathological abnormalities seen in A-T patients also are present in Atm mutant mice. In addition, we report a previously unrecognized effect of Atm deficiency on development or maintenance of CD4 (+) 8 (+) thymocytes. We discuss these findings in the context of the hypothesis that abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes contributes to the pathogenesis of A-T.. 

neuropathological abnormalities