Changes at P183 of emerin weaken its protein-protein interactions resulting in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy characterized by early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and spine, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and cardiomyopathy associated with cardiac conduction defects. The emerin gene has been mapped to Xq28 and encodes a 34-kDa serine-rich protein, emerin, which has been localized to the nuclear envelope in a wide variety of tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mutations spanning the emerin gene have been identified in patients with EDMD. We present here the effect, on emerin protein expression, of two missense mutations identified in unrelated EDMD patients. These alterations predict the replacement of a proline residue at position 183 with either a histidine or a threonine. Biochemical analysis has demonstrated that the mobility and expression levels of the mutant forms of emerin are indistinguishable from that of wild-type emerin, but that they have weakened interactions with nuclear lamina components. In comparison with the usual EDMD phenotype, patients with P183 missense mutations have a later age at onset of first symptoms, elbow contractures, ankle contractures, upper limb weakness and lower limb weakness, but there is no difference for the age at onset of cardiac involvement. This is the first report of protein studies on patients with missense mutations resulting in the clinical features of EDMD. These studies demonstrate the importance of proline 183 for the proper structure/function of emerin.. 

muscle wasting
Heterozygous loss of Six5 in mice is sufficient to cause ocular cataracts.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by skeletal muscle wasting, myotonia, cardiac arrhythmia, hyperinsulinaemia, mental retardation and ocular cataracts. The genetic defect in DM is a CTG repeat expansion located in the 3 untranslated region of DMPK and 5 of a homeodomain-encoding gene, SIX5 (formerly DMAHP; refs 2-5). There are three mechanisms by which CTG expansion can result in DM. First, repeat expansion may alter the processing or transport of the mutant DMPK mRNA and consequently reduce DMPK levels. Second, CTG expansion may establish a region of heterochromatin 3 of the repeat sequence and decrease SIX5 transcription. Third, toxic effects of the repeat expansion may be intrinsic to the repeated elements at the level of DNA or RNA (refs 10, 11). Previous studies have demonstrated that a dose-dependent loss of Dm15 (the mouse DMPK homologue) in mice produces a partial DM phenotype characterized by decreased development of skeletal muscle force and cardiac conduction disorders. To test the role of Six5 loss in DM, we have analysed a strain of mice in which Six5 was deleted. Our results demonstrate that the rate and severity of cataract formation is inversely related to Six5 dosage and is temporally progressive. Six5 +/- and Six5-/- mice show increased steady-state levels of the Na +/K + -ATPase alpha-1 subunit and decreased Dm15 mRNA levels. Thus, altered ion homeostasis within the lens may contribute to cataract formation. As ocular cataracts are a characteristic feature of DM, these results demonstrate that decreased SIX5 transcription is important in the aetiology of DM. Our data support the hypothesis that DM is a contiguous gene syndrome associated with the partial loss of both DMPK and SIX5.. 

muscle wasting
Severe clinical expression in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a relatively rare benign neuromuscular disorder which can vary remarkably in onset, course and severity. In the present study, a TCTAC deletion spanning the nucleotides 631-635 of the emerin gene caused an unusually severe disease phenotype including loss of ambulation and severe muscle wasting in two affected brothers. The same mutation has been reported previously in an unrelated family showing a significantly milder phenotype. The interfamilial heterogeneity in distribution and in severity of the features in the two families point to environmental or genetic modification as the cause of clinical variability in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.. 

muscle wasting
A novel frameshift mutation in the McLeod syndrome gene in a Japanese family.
We report a novel mutation in the XK gene (XK) in a Japanese patient with McLeod syndrome. A 50-year-old man showed progressive muscular atrophy, choreic movement, elevated level of serum creatinine kinase, and acanthocytosis. The expression level of all the Kell antigens in erythrocyte was decreased and molecular analysis revealed a single-base (T) deletion at the nucleotide position 1095 in XK. This deletion caused a frameshift in translation, leading to a premature stop codon at the amino acid position 408. We conclude this single-base deletion causes defective Kx protein, which is responsible for the McLeod phenotype in this patient.. 

muscular atrophy