Mice deficient in Six5 develop cataracts: implications for myotonic dystrophy.
Expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in the 3 UTR of the gene DMPK at the DM1 locus on chromosome 19 causes myotonic dystrophy, a dominantly inherited disease characterized by skeletal muscle dystrophy and myotonia, cataracts and cardiac conduction defects. Targeted deletion of Dm15, the mouse orthologue of human DMPK, produced mice with a mild myopathy and cardiac conduction abnormalities, but without other features of myotonic dystrophy, such as myotonia and cataracts. We, and others, have demonstrated that repeat expansion decreases expression of the adjacent gene SIX5 (refs 7, 8), which encodes a homeodomain transcription factor. To determine whether SIX5 deficiency contributes to the myotonic dystrophy phenotype, we disrupted mouse Six5 by replacing the first exon with a beta-galactosidase reporter. Six5-mutant mice showed reporter expression in multiple tissues, including the developing lens. Homozygous mutant mice had no apparent abnormalities of skeletal muscle function, but developed lenticular opacities at a higher rate than controls. Our results suggest that SIX5 deficiency contributes to the cataract phenotype in myotonic dystrophy, and that myotonic dystrophy represents a multigenic disorder.. 

myopathy
Skewed X inactivation in a female MZ twin results in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
One of female MZ twins presented with muscular dystrophy. Physical examination, creatine phosphokinase levels, and muscle biopsy were consistent with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). However, because of her sex she was diagnosed as having limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. With cDNA probes to the DMD gene, a gene deletion was detected in the twins and their mother. The de novo mutation which arose in the mother was shown by novel junction fragments generated by HindIII, PstI, or TaqI when probed with cDNA8. Additional evidence of a large gene deletion was given by novel SfiI junction fragments detected by probes p20, J-Bir, and J-66 on pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Immunoblot analysis of muscle from the affected twin showed dystrophin of normal size but of reduced amount. Immunofluorescent visualization of dystrophin revealed foci of dystrophin-positive fibers adjacent to foci of dystrophin-negative fibers. These data indicate that the affected twin is a manifesting carrier of an abnormal DMD gene, her myopathy being a direct result of underexpression of dystrophin. Cytogenetic analysis revealed normal karyotypes, eliminating the possibility of a translocation affecting DMD gene function. Both linkage analysis and DNA fingerprint analysis revealed that each twin has two different X chromosomes, eliminating the possibility of uniparental disomy as a mechanism for DMD expression. On the basis of methylation differences of the paternal and maternal X chromosomes in these MZ twins, we propose uneven lyonization (X chromosome inactivation) as the underlying mechanism for disease expression in the affected female.. 

myopathy
Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy: correlation of phenotype by electroretinography with sites of dystrophin mutations.
The dark-adapted electroretinogram (ERG) of patients with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) shows a marked reduction in b-wave amplitude. Genotype-phenotype studies of mouse models for DMD show position-specific effects of the mutations upon the phenotype  mice with 5 defects of dystrophin have normal ERGs, those with defects in the central region have a normal b-wave amplitude associated with prolonged implicit times for both the b-wave and oscillatory potentials, and mice with 3 defects have a phenotype similar to that seen in  DMD/BMD patients. The mouse studies suggest a key role for the carboxyl terminal dystrophin isoform, Dp260, in retinal electrophysiology. We have undertaken a systematic evaluation of DMD/BMD patients through clinical examination and review of the literature in order to determine whether the position-specific effects of mutations noted in the mouse are present in man. We have found that, in man, a wider variation of DMD defects correlate with reductions in the b-wave amplitude. Individuals with normal ERGs have mutations predominantly located 5 of the transcript initiation site of Dp260. Our results suggest that the most important determinant in the ERG b-wave phenotype is the mutation position, rather than muscle disease severity. Forty-six per cent of patients with mutations 5 of the Dp260 transcript start site have abnormal ERGs, as opposed to 94% with more distal mutations. The human genotype-phenotype correlations are consistent with a role for Dp260 in normal retinal electrophysiology and may also reflect the expression of other C-terminal dystrophin isoforms and their contributions to retinal signal transmission.. 

muscle disease
Localization of the region homologous to the Duchenne muscular dystrophy locus on the mouse X chromosome.
Recent progress has resulted in part of the gene mutated in Duchenne and the milder Becker muscular dystrophies being cloned and has suggested that the gene itself extends over 1, 000 to 2, 000 kilobases (kb). To study how mutations in this gene affect muscle development and integrity, it would be of interest to have available a mouse model of the human disease. The mouse mdx mutation affects muscle and confers a mild dystrophic syndrome, but it is not clear whether this mutation is equivalent to Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy in man. Here we describe the use of two sequences from the human Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) gene that cross-hybridize to mouse X-linked sequences to localize the gene homologous to DMD in the mouse. Both sequences map to the region of 10 centimorgan lying between the Tabby (Ta) and St14-1 (DxPas8) loci, close to the phosphorylase b kinase locus (Phk). By analogy with the human X-chromosome, we conclude that the region in the mouse around the G6pd and St14-1 loci may contain two genes corresponding to distinct human myopathies  Emery Dreifuss muscular dystrophy which is known to be closely linked to St14-1 in man and the DMD homologue described here.. 

myopathies
Myotonic dystrophy in transgenic mice expressing an expanded CUG repeat.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM), the most common form of muscular dystrophy in adult humans, results from expansion of a CTG repeat in the 3 untranslated region of the DMPK gene. The mutant DMPK messenger RNA (mRNA) contains an expanded CUG repeat and is retained in the nucleus. We have expressed an untranslated CUG repeat in an unrelated mRNA in transgenic mice. Mice that expressed expanded CUG repeats developed myotonia and myopathy, whereas mice expressing a nonexpanded repeat did not. Thus, transcripts with expanded CUG repeats are sufficient to generate a DM phenotype. This result supports a role for RNA gain of function in disease pathogenesis.. 

myopathy
Emerin, deficiency of which causes Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, is localized at the inner nuclear membrane.
X-linked recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an inherited muscle disorder characterized by the clinical triad of progressive wasting of humero-peroneal muscles, early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and postcervical muscles, and cardiac conduction block with a high risk of sudden death. The gene for EDMD on Xq28 encodes a novel protein named emerin that localizes at the nuclear membrane of skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscles and some other non-muscle tissues. To investigate a possible physiological role for emerin, we examined the ultrastructural localization of the protein in human skeletal muscle and HeLa cells, using ultrathin cryosections. We found that the immune-labeled colloidal gold particles were localized on the nucleoplasmic surface of the inner nuclear membrane, but not on the nuclear pore. Emerin stayed on the cytoplasmic surface of the nuclear lamina, even after detergent treatment that solubilizes membrane lipids and washes out membrane proteins. These results suggest that emerin anchors at the inner nuclear membrane through the hydrophobic stretch, and protrudes from the hydrophilic region to the nucleoplasm where it interacts with the nuclear lamina. We speculate that emerin contributes to maintain the nuclear structure and stability, as well as nuclear functions, particularly in muscle tissues that have severe stress with rigorous contraction-relaxation movements and calcium flux.. 

inherited muscle disorder
Molecular basis of human mitochondrial very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing cardiomyopathy and sudden death in childhood.
beta-Oxidation of long-chain fatty acids provides the major source of energy in the heart. Defects in enzymes of the beta-oxidation pathway cause sudden, unexplained death in childhood, acute hepatic encephalopathy or liver failure, skeletal myopathy, and cardiomyopathy. Very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase [VLCAD; very-long-chain-acyl-CoA  (acceptor) 2, 3-oxidoreductase, EC 1. 3 3. 99 99. 13] catalyzes the first step in beta-oxidation. We have isolated the human VLCAD cDNA and gene and determined the complete nucleotide sequences. Polymerase chain reaction amplification of VLCAD mRNA and genomic exons defined the molecular defects in two patients with VLCAD deficiency who presented with unexplained cardiac arrest and cardiomyopathy. In one, a homozygous mutation in the consensus dinucleotide of the donor splice site (g + 1-- > a) was associated with universal skipping of the prior exon (exon 11). The second patient was a compound heterozygote, with a missense mutation, C1837-- > T, changing the arginine at residue 613 to tryptophan on one allele and a single base deletion at the intron-exon 6 boundary as the second mutation. This initial delineation of human mutations in VLCAD suggests that VLCAD deficiency reduces myocardial fatty acid beta-oxidation and energy production and is associated with cardiomyopathy and sudden death in childhood. 

skeletal myopathy
Myotonic dystrophy: evidence for a possible dominant-negative RNA mutation.
The trinucleotide expansion mutation causing myotonic dystrophy is in the 3 untranslated region of a protein kinase gene. The molecular mechanisms by which the expanded repeat causes the clinically variable and multisystemic disease, myotonic dystrophy, are not understood. It has been particularly difficult to rationalize the dominant inheritance with the fact that the expansion mutation lies outside of the protein-encoding gene elements, and should not be translated into protein. Here we use muscle biopsies from classical adult-onset myotonic dystrophy patients to study the accumulation of transcripts from both the normal and expanded DM kinase genes in patient muscle, and compare the results to normal and myopathic controls. We found relatively small decreases of DM kinase RNA in the total RNA pool from muscle; however, these reductions were not disease specific. Analysis of poly (A) + RNA showed dramatic decreases of both the mutant and normal DM kinase RNAs, and these changes were disease-specific. Our findings are consistent with a novel molecular pathogenetic mechanism for myotonic dystrophy  both the normal and expanded DM kinase genes are transcribed in patient muscle, but the abnormal expansion-containing RNA has a dominant effect on RNA metabolism by preventing the accumulation of poly (A) + RNA. The ability of the expansion mutation to alter accumulation of poly (A) + RNA in trans suggests that myotonic dystrophy may be the first example of a dominant-negative mutation manifested at the RNA level.. 

myopathic