Constitutive and regulated modes of splicing produce six major myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) isoforms with distinct properties.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is the most prevalent inherited neuromuscular disease in adults. The genetic defect is a CTG triplet repeat expansion in the 3-untranslated region of the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) gene, consisting of 15 exons. Using a transgenic DMPK-overexpressor mouse model, we demonstrate here that the endogenous mouse DMPK gene and the human DMPK transgene produce six major alternatively spliced mRNAs which have almost identical cell type-dependent distribution frequencies and expression patterns. Use of a cryptic 5 splice site in exon 8, which results in absence or presence of 15 nucleotides specifying a VSGGG peptide motif, and/or use of a cryptic 3 splice site in exon 14, which leads to a frameshift in the mRNA reading frame, occur as independent stochastic events in all tissues examined. In contrast, the excision of exons 13/14 that causes a frameshift and creates a C-terminally truncated protein is clearly cell type dependent and occurs predominantly in smooth muscle. We generated all six full-length mouse cDNAs that result from combinations of these three major splicing events and show that their transfection into cells in culture leads to production of four different approximately 74 kDa full-length (heart-, skeletal muscle- or brain-specific) and two C-terminally truncated approximately 68 kDa (smooth muscle-specific) isoforms. Information on DMPK mRNA and protein isoform expression patterns will be useful for recognizing differential effects of (CTG) (n) expansion in DM manifestation.. 

inherited neuromuscular disease
Myotonic dystrophy: size- and sex-dependent dynamics of CTG meiotic instability, and somatic mosaicism.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is a progressive neuromuscular disorder which results from elongations of an unstable (CTG) n repeat, located in the 3 untranslated region of the DM gene. A correlation has been demonstrated between the increase in the repeat number of this sequence and the severity of the disease. However, the clinical status of patients cannot be unambiguously ascertained solely on the basis of the number of CTG repeats. Moreover, the exclusive maternal inheritance of the congenital form remains unexplained. Our observation of differently sized repeats in various DM tissues from the same individual may explain why the size of the mutation observed in lymphocytes does not necessarily correlate with the severity and nature of symptoms. Through a molecular and genetic study of 142 families including 418 DM patients, we have investigated the dynamics of the CTG repeat meiotic instability. A positive correlation between the size of the repeat and the intergenerational enlargement was observed similarly through male and female meioses for < or = 0. 5-kb CTG sequences. Beyond 0. 5 kb, the intergenerational variation was more important through female meioses, whereas a tendency to compression was observed almost exclusively in male meioses, for > or = 1. 5-kb fragments. This implies a size- and sex-dependent meiotic instability. Moreover, segregation analysis supports the hypothesis of a maternal as well as a familial predisposition for the occurrence of the congenital form. Finally, this analysis reveals a significant excess of transmitting grandfathers partially accounted for by increased fertility in affected males 

neuromuscular disorder
Emerin deficiency at the nuclear membrane in patients with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Mutations in the STA gene at the Xq28 locus have been found in patients with X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). This gene encodes a hitherto unknown protein named emerin. To elucidate the subcellular localization of emerin, we raised two antisera against synthetic peptide fragments predicted from emerin cDNA. Using both antisera, we found positive nuclear membrane staining in skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscles in the normal controls and in patients with neuromuscular diseases other than EDMD. In contrast, a deficiency in immunofluorescent staining of skeletal and cardiac muscle from EDMD patients was observed. A 34 kD protein is immunoreactive with the antisera--the protein is equivalent to that predicted for emerin. Together, our findings suggest the specific deficiency of emerin in the nuclear membrane of muscle cells in patients with EDMD.. 

neuromuscular diseases
Severe clinical expression in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a relatively rare benign neuromuscular disorder which can vary remarkably in onset, course and severity. In the present study, a TCTAC deletion spanning the nucleotides 631-635 of the emerin gene caused an unusually severe disease phenotype including loss of ambulation and severe muscle wasting in two affected brothers. The same mutation has been reported previously in an unrelated family showing a significantly milder phenotype. The interfamilial heterogeneity in distribution and in severity of the features in the two families point to environmental or genetic modification as the cause of clinical variability in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.. 

benign neuromuscular disorder