Utilization of purines by an HPRT variant in an intelligent, nonmutilative patient with features of the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
The patient, H. Chr. B., was among the first reported with hyperuricemia and central nervous system symptoms. He has been found to have a variant of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT; E. C. 2. 4. 2. 8) distinct from the enzyme present in patients with the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. The patient had chroeoathetosis, spasticity, dysarthric speech, and hyperuricemia. However, his intelligence was normal and he had no evidence of self-mutilation. There was no activity of HPRT in the lysates of erythrocytes and cultured fibroblasts when analyzed in the usual manner. Using a newly developed method for the study of purine metabolism in intact cultured cells, this patient was found to metabolize some 9% of 8-14C-hypoxanthine, and 90% of the isotope utilized was converted to adenine and guanine nucleotides. In contrast, cells from patients with the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome were virtually completely unable to convert hypoxanthine to nucleotides. The patients fibroblasts were even more efficient in the metabolism of 8-14C-guanine, which was utilized to the extent of 27%, over 80% of which was converted to guanine and adenine nucleotides. The growth of the cultured fibroblasts of this patient was intermediate in media containing hypoxanthine aminopterin thymidine (HAT), whereas the growth of Lesch-Nyhan cells was inhibited and normal cells grew normally. Similarly in 8-azaguanine, 6-thioguanine, and 8-azahypoxanthine, the growth of the patients cells was intermediate between normal and Lesch-Nyhan cells. These observations provide further evidence for genetic heterogeneity among patients with disorders in purine metabolism involving the HPRT gene. They document that this famous patient did not have the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome 

spasticity
The molecular basis of Sjogren-Larsson syndrome: mutation analysis of the fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase gene.
Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by ichthyosis, mental retardation, spasticity, and deficient activity of fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH). To define the molecular defects causing SLS, we performed mutation analysis of the FALDH gene in probands from 63 kindreds with SLS. Among these patients, 49 different mutations-including 10 deletions, 2 insertions, 22 amino acid substitutions, 3 nonsense mutations, 9 splice-site defects, and 3 complex mutations-were found. All of the patients with SLS were found to carry mutations. Nineteen of the missense mutations resulted in a severe reduction of FALDH enzyme catalytic activity when expressed in mammalian cells, but one mutation (798G-- > C [K266N]) seemed to have a greater effect on mRNA stability. The splice-site mutations led to exon skipping or utilization of cryptic acceptor-splice sites. Thirty-seven mutations were private, and 12 mutations were seen in two or more probands of European or Middle Eastern descent. Four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were found in the FALDH gene. At least four of the common mutations (551C-- > T, 682C-- > T, 733G-- > A, and 798 + 1delG) were associated with multiple SNP haplotypes, suggesting that these mutations originated independently on more than one occasion or were ancient SLS genes that had undergone intragenic recombination. Our results demonstrate that SLS is caused by a strikingly heterogeneous group of mutations in the FALDH gene and provide a framework for understanding the genetic basis of SLS and the development of DNA-based diagnostic tests.. 

spasticity