Knobloch syndrome involving midline scalp defect of the frontal region.
We report on a 4-year-old boy with Knobloch syndrome. He has vitreoretinal degeneration, high myopia, cataract, telecanthus, hypertelorism, and a high-arched palate. He also has a defect of the anterior midline scalp with involvement of the frontal bone as documented by a computed tomography (CT) scan. The brain was normal on CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging. We present a review of the 23 published cases with this syndrome. Our patient illustrates the importance of investigating for underlying ocular and central nervous system pathology whenever midline scalp defects are present.. 

high myopia
Small deletions in the type II collagen triple helix produce kniest dysplasia.
Kniest dysplasia is a moderately severe type II collagenopathy, characterized by short trunk and limbs, kyphoscoliosis, midface hypoplasia, severe myopia, and hearing loss. Mutations in the gene that encodes type II collagen (COL2A1), the predominant protein of cartilage, have been identified in a number of individuals with Kniest dysplasia. All but two of these previously described mutations cause in-frame deletions in type II collagen, either by small deletions in the gene or splice site alterations. Furthermore, all but one of these mutations is located between exons 12 and 24 in the COL2A1 gene. We used heteroduplex analysis to identify sequence anomalies in five individuals with Kniest dysplasia. Sequencing of the index patients genomic DNA identified four new dominant mutations in COL2A1 that result in Kniest dysplasia  a 21-bp deletion in exon 16, an 18-bp deletion in exon 19, and 4-bp deletions in the splice donor sites of introns 14 and 20. A previously described 28-bp deletion at the COL2A1 exon 12-intron 12 junction, deleting the splice donor site, was identified in the fifth case. The latter three mutations are predicted to result in exon skipping in the mRNA encoded from the mutant allele. These data suggest that Kniest dysplasia results from shorter type II collagen monomers, and support the hypothesis that alteration of a specific COL2A1 domain, which may span from exons 12 to 24, leads to the Kniest dysplasia phenotype.. 

myopia
Homozygosity mapping in a family with microcephaly, mental retardation, and short stature to a Cohen syndrome region on 8q21.3-8q22.1: redefining a clinical entity.
A syndrome of microcephaly, progressive postnatal growth deficiency, and mental retardation was observed in two brothers and their cousin from a multiply consanguineous kindred of Lebanese descent. Hypotonia, chorioretinal dystrophy, and myopia were also identified. The severity of the condition varied among the closely related patients. Because of absence of a distinctive facial appearance, the degree of mental retardation, and short stature, the initially considered clinical diagnosis of Cohen syndrome was withdrawn and a novel genetic entity was assumed. Homozygosity mapping in this family assigned the gene to a 26. 8-cM region on the chromosome band 8q21. 3 -22. 1, between the microsatellites at D8S270 and D8S514. The maximum two-point LOD score was found for marker at D8S267 (Zmax = 3.. 237 at Omax = 0. 00). Intriguingly enough, the identified gene region overlaps the refined gene region for Cohen syndrome (COH1) [Kolehmainen et al., 1997  Euro J Hum Genet 5  206-213]. This fact encourages the hypothesis that the described kindred segregates for a variant of Cohen syndrome and suggests a redefinition of its phenotype 

myopia
A single amino acid substitution (G103D) in the type II collagen triple helix produces Kniest dysplasia.
Kniest dysplasia is a moderately severe chondrodysplasia phenotype that results from mutations in the gene for type II collagen, COL2A1. Characteristics of the disorder include a short trunk and extremities, mid-face hypoplasia, cleft palate, myopia, retinal detachment, and hearing loss. Recently, deletions of all or part of exon 12 have been identified in individuals with Kniest dysplasia, suggesting that mutations within this region of the protein may primarily result in the Kniest dysplasia phenotype. We used SSCP to analyze an amplified genomic DNA fragment containing exon 12 from seven individuals with Kniest dysplasia. An abnormality was identified in one patient. DNA sequence analysis demonstrated that the patient was heterozygous for a G to A transition that implied substitution of glycine103 of the triple helical domain by aspartate. The mutation was not observed in DNA from either of the clinically unaffected parents of the proband. Protein microsequencing demonstrated expression of the abnormal allele in cartilage. These data demonstrate that point mutations which result in single amino acid substitutions can produce Kniest dysplasia and further support the hypothesis that alteration of a domain, which includes the region encoded by exon 12, in the type II collagen protein leads to this disorder.. 

myopia