Statistical analysis of the two stage mutation model in von Hippel-Lindau disease, and in sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma and renal cell carcinoma.
Analysis of the age incidence curves for unilateral and bilateral retinoblastoma led Knudson to propose that hereditary tumours may arise by a single event and sporadic tumours by a two stage mutation process. It has been suggested recently that sporadic renal cell carcinoma may arise from a two stage mutation process. We analysed the age incidence curves for symptomatic renal cell carcinoma (n = 26) and cerebellar haemangioblastoma (n = 68) in 109 patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, and compared them to 104 patients with sporadic renal cell carcinoma and 43 patients with sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma. The age incidence curves for renal cell carcinoma and cerebellar haemangioblastoma in VHL disease were compatible with a single mutation model, whereas the age incidence curves for sporadic renal cell carcinoma and cerebellar haemangioblastoma suggested a two stage mutation process. These data are compatible with the VHL gene functioning as a recessive tumour suppressor gene. Sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma and some renal cell carcinoma may arise from somatic mutations inactivating both alleles at the VHL locus.. 

hereditary tumours
Constitutional von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene deletions detected in VHL families by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an autosomal dominantly inherited cancer syndrome predisposing to a variety of tumor types that include retinal hemangioblastomas, hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system, renal cell carcinomas, pancreatic cysts and tumors, pheochromocytomas, endolymphatic sac tumors, and epididymal cystadenomas [W. M. Linehan et al., J. Am. Med. Assoc., 273  564-570, 1995; E. A. Maher and W. G. Kaelin, Jr., Medicine (Baltimore), 76  381-391, 1997; W. M. Linehan and R. D. Klausner, In  B. Vogelstein and K. Kinzler (eds.), The Genetic Basis of Human Cancer, pp. 455-473, McGraw-Hill, 1998]. The VHL gene was localized to chromosome 3p25-26 and cloned [F. Latif et al., Science (Washington DC), 260  1317-1320, 1993]. Germline mutations in the VHL gene have been detected in the majority of VHL kindreds. The reported frequency of detection of VHL germline mutations has varied from 39 to 80% (J. M. Whaley et al., Am. J. Hum. Genet., 55  1092-1102, 1994; Clinical Research Group for Japan, Hum. Mol. Genet., 4  2233-2237, 1995; F. Chen et al., Hum. Mutat., 5  66-75, 1995; E. R. Maher et al., J. Med. Genet., 33  328-332, 1996; B. Zbar, Cancer Surv., 25  219-232, 1995). Recently a quantitative Southern blotting procedure was found to improve this frequency (C. Stolle et al., Hum. Mutat., 12  417-423, 1998). In the present study, we report the use of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as a method to detect and characterize VHL germline deletions. We reexamined a group of VHL patients shown previously by single-strand conformation and sequencing analysis not to harbor point mutations in the VHL locus. We found constitutional deletions in 29 of 30 VHL patients in this group using cosmid and P1 probes that cover the VHL locus. We then tested six phenotypically normal offspring from four of these VHL families  two were found to carry the deletion and the other four were deletion-free. In addition, germline mosaicism of the VHL gene was identified in one family. In sum, FISH was found to be a simple and reliable method to detect VHL germline deletions and practically useful in cases where other methods of screening have failed to detect a VHL gene abnormality 

autosomal dominantly inherited cancer syndrome
BRCA1 mutations in primary breast and ovarian carcinomas.
Loss of heterozygosity data from familial tumors suggest that BRCA1, a gene that confers susceptibility to ovarian and early-onset breast cancer, encodes a tumor suppressor. The BRCA1 region is also subject to allelic loss in sporadic breast and ovarian cancers, an indication that BRCA1 mutations may occur somatically in these tumors. The BRCA1 coding region was examined for mutations in primary breast and ovarian tumors that show allele loss at the BRCA1 locus. Mutations were detected in 3 of 32 breast and 1 of 12 ovarian carcinomas; all four mutations were germline alterations and occurred in early-onset cancers. These results suggest that mutation of BRCA1 may not be critical in the development of the majority of breast and ovarian cancers that arise in the absence of a mutant germline allele.. 

familial tumors
Genotype-phenotype correlations in families with deletions in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene.
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a hereditary tumor syndrome characterized by predisposition for bilateral and multi-centric hemangioblastoma in the retina and central nervous system, pheochromocytoma, renal cell carcinoma, and cysts in the kidney, pancreas, and epididymis. We describe five families for which direct sequencing of the coding region of the VHL gene had failed to identify the family-specific mutation. Further molecular analysis revealed deletions involving the VHL gene in each of these families. In four families, partial deletions of one or more exons were detected by Southern blot analysis. In the fifth family, FISH analysis demonstrated the deletion of the entire VHL gene. Our results show that (quantitative) Southern blot analysis is a sensitive method for detecting germline deletions of the VHL gene and should be implemented in routine DNA diagnosis for VHL disease. Our data support the previously established observation that families with a germline deletion have a low risk for pheochromocytoma. Further unraveling of genotype-phenotype correlations in VHL disease has revealed that families with a full or partial deletion of the VHL gene exhibit a phenotype with a preponderance of central nervous system hemangioblastoma.. 

hereditary tumor syndrome
Clinicopathologic features of BRCA-linked and sporadic ovarian cancer.
CONTEXT  Most hereditary ovarian cancers are associated with germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Attempts to define the clinical significance of BRCA mutation status in ovarian cancer have produced conflicting results, especially regarding survival. OBJECTIVE  To determine whether hereditary ovarian cancers have distinct clinical and pathological features compared with sporadic (nonhereditary) ovarian cancers. DESIGN AND SETTING  Retrospective cohort study of a consecutive series of 933 ovarian cancers diagnosed and treated at our institution, which is a comprehensive cancer center as designated by the National Cancer Institute, over a 12-year period (December 1986 to August 1998). PATIENTS  The study was restricted to patients of Jewish origin because of the ease of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genotyping in this ethnic group. From the 189 patients who identified themselves as Jewish, 88 hereditary cases were identified with the presence of a germline founder mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2. The remaining 101 cases from the same series not associated with a BRCA mutation and 2 additional groups (Gynecologic Oncology Group protocols 52 and 111) with ovarian cancer from clinical trials (for the survival analysis) were included for comparison. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES  Age at diagnosis, surgical stage, histologic cell type and grade, and surgical outcome; and response to chemotherapy and survival for advanced-stage (II and IV) cases. RESULTS  Hereditary cancers were rarely diagnosed before age 40 years and were common after age 60 years, with mean age at diagnosis being significantly younger for BRCA1- vs BRCA2-linked patients (54 vs 62 years; P =. 04). Histology, grade, stage, and success of cytoreductive surgery were similar for hereditary and sporadic cases. The hereditary group had a longer disease-free interval following primary chemotherapy in comparison with the nonhereditary group, with a median time to recurrence of 14 months and 7 months, respectively (P <. 001). Those with hereditary cancers had improved survival compared with the nonhereditary group (P =. 004). For stage III cancers, BRCA mutation status was an independent prognostic variable (P =. 03). CONCLUSIONS  Although BRCA-associated hereditary ovarian cancers in this population have surgical and pathological characteristics similar to those of sporadic cancers, advanced-stage hereditary cancer patients survive longer than nonhereditary cancer patients. Age penetrance is greater for BRCA1-linked than for BRCA2-linked cancers in this population.

advanced-stage hereditary cancer