Constitutional von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene deletions detected in VHL families by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an autosomal dominantly inherited cancer syndrome predisposing to a variety of tumor types that include retinal hemangioblastomas, hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system, renal cell carcinomas, pancreatic cysts and tumors, pheochromocytomas, endolymphatic sac tumors, and epididymal cystadenomas [W. M. Linehan et al., J. Am. Med. Assoc., 273  564-570, 1995; E. A. Maher and W. G. Kaelin, Jr., Medicine (Baltimore), 76  381-391, 1997; W. M. Linehan and R. D. Klausner, In  B. Vogelstein and K. Kinzler (eds.), The Genetic Basis of Human Cancer, pp. 455-473, McGraw-Hill, 1998]. The VHL gene was localized to chromosome 3p25-26 and cloned [F. Latif et al., Science (Washington DC), 260  1317-1320, 1993]. Germline mutations in the VHL gene have been detected in the majority of VHL kindreds. The reported frequency of detection of VHL germline mutations has varied from 39 to 80% (J. M. Whaley et al., Am. J. Hum. Genet., 55  1092-1102, 1994; Clinical Research Group for Japan, Hum. Mol. Genet., 4  2233-2237, 1995; F. Chen et al., Hum. Mutat., 5  66-75, 1995; E. R. Maher et al., J. Med. Genet., 33  328-332, 1996; B. Zbar, Cancer Surv., 25  219-232, 1995). Recently a quantitative Southern blotting procedure was found to improve this frequency (C. Stolle et al., Hum. Mutat., 12  417-423, 1998). In the present study, we report the use of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as a method to detect and characterize VHL germline deletions. We reexamined a group of VHL patients shown previously by single-strand conformation and sequencing analysis not to harbor point mutations in the VHL locus. We found constitutional deletions in 29 of 30 VHL patients in this group using cosmid and P1 probes that cover the VHL locus. We then tested six phenotypically normal offspring from four of these VHL families  two were found to carry the deletion and the other four were deletion-free. In addition, germline mosaicism of the VHL gene was identified in one family. In sum, FISH was found to be a simple and reliable method to detect VHL germline deletions and practically useful in cases where other methods of screening have failed to detect a VHL gene abnormality 

pheochromocytomas
Genotype-phenotype correlations in families with deletions in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene.
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a hereditary tumor syndrome characterized by predisposition for bilateral and multi-centric hemangioblastoma in the retina and central nervous system, pheochromocytoma, renal cell carcinoma, and cysts in the kidney, pancreas, and epididymis. We describe five families for which direct sequencing of the coding region of the VHL gene had failed to identify the family-specific mutation. Further molecular analysis revealed deletions involving the VHL gene in each of these families. In four families, partial deletions of one or more exons were detected by Southern blot analysis. In the fifth family, FISH analysis demonstrated the deletion of the entire VHL gene. Our results show that (quantitative) Southern blot analysis is a sensitive method for detecting germline deletions of the VHL gene and should be implemented in routine DNA diagnosis for VHL disease. Our data support the previously established observation that families with a germline deletion have a low risk for pheochromocytoma. Further unraveling of genotype-phenotype correlations in VHL disease has revealed that families with a full or partial deletion of the VHL gene exhibit a phenotype with a preponderance of central nervous system hemangioblastoma.. 

pheochromocytoma
pheochromocytoma
Von Hippel-Lindau disease maps to the region of chromosome 3 associated with renal cell carcinoma.
Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is an autosomal dominant disorder with inherited susceptibility to various forms of cancer, including hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system, phaeochromocytomas, pancreatic malignancies, and renal cell carcinomas. Renal cell carcinomas constitute a particularly frequent cause of death in this disorder, occurring as bilateral and multifocal tumours, and presenting at an earlier age than in sporadic, non-familial cases of this tumour type. We report here that the VHL gene is linked to the locus encoding the human homologoue of the RAF1 oncogene, which maps to chromosome 3p25 (ref. 4). Crossovers with the VHL locus suggest that the defect responsible for the VHL phenotype is not a mutation in the RAF1 gene itself. An alternative or prior event to oncogene activation in tumour formation may be the inactivation of a putative tumour suppressor which can be associated with both the inherited and sporadic forms of the cancer. Sporadic renal cell carcinomas have previously been associated with the loss of regions on chromosome 3p (refs 5, 6). Consequently, sporadic and VHL-associated forms of renal cell carcinoma might both result from alterations causing loss of function of the same tumour suppressor gene on this chromosome.. 

phaeochromocytomas