Genomic structure of the EWS gene and its relationship to EWSR1, a site of tumor-associated chromosome translocation.
The EWS gene has been identified based on its location at the chromosome 22 breakpoint of the t (11; 22) (q24; q12) translocation that characterizes Ewing sarcoma and related neuroectodermal tumors. The EWS gene spans about 40 kb of DNA and is encoded by 17 exons. The nucleotide sequence of the exons is identical to that of the previously described cDNA. The first 7 exons encode the N-terminal domain of EWS, which consists of a repeated degenerated polypeptide of 7 to 12 residues rich in tyrosine, serine, threonine, glycine, and glutamine. Exons 11, 12, and 13 encode the putative RNA binding domain. The three glycine- and arginine-rich motifs of the gene are mainly encoded by exons 8-9, 14, and 16. The DNA sequence in the 5 region of the gene has features of a CpG-rich island and lacks canonical promoter elements, such as TATA and CCAAT consensus sequences. Positions of the chromosome 22 breakpoints were determined for 19 Ewing tumors. They were localized in introns 7 or 8 in 18 cases and in intron 10 in 1 case.. 

Ewing sarcoma
Ewing tumors
The EWS gene, involved in Ewing family of tumors, malignant melanoma of soft parts and desmoplastic small round cell tumors, codes for an RNA binding protein with novel regulatory domains.
The EWS gene, which maps to band q12 of human chromosome 22, is involved in a wide variety of human solid tumors including Ewing sarcoma, related primitive neuroectodermal tumors, malignant melanoma of soft parts and desmoplastic small round cell tumors. In these tumors, the EWS is fused to genes encoding transcriptional activators/repressors, like Fli-1 or erg or ATF 1 or wt1. To better understand the function of the EWS protein, we cloned the EWS cDNA. Sequence analysis of this cDNA revealed differential splicing involving two exons encoding 72 amino acids. Both alternatively spliced transcripts, EWS and EWS-b, are expressed in a variety of cells. Because EWS proteins contain putative conserved RNA binding motifs, we studied the RNA binding properties of the EWS protein. The EWS-b protein binds to RNA in vitro and, specifically, to poly G and poly U. The RNA binding activity was localized to the carboxy terminal 86 amino acids, which constitute RGG box. Thus the amino terminal domain of EWS (NTD-EWS), which is involved in chromosome translocation may regulate the specificity of RNA binding activity of EWS. An EWS-erg chimeric protein, which is found in Ewings sarcoma cells, functions as a transcriptional activator. Mutational analysis of EWS-erg chimeric protein revealed that NTD-EWS functions as a regulatory domain for the transcriptional activation properties of EWS-erg chimeric protein.. 

Ewing family of tumors
Ewing sarcoma
Ewings sarcoma