A zinc finger truncation of murine WT1 results in the characteristic urogenital abnormalities of Denys-Drash syndrome .
The Wilms tumor -suppressor gene, WT1, plays a key role in urogenital development, and WT1 dysfunction is implicated in both neoplastic (Wilms tumor, mesothelioma, leukemias, and breast cancer) and nonneoplastic (glomerulosclerosis) disease. The analysis of diseases linked specifically with WT1 mutations, such as Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), can provide valuable insight concerning the role of WT1 in development and disease. DDS is a rare childhood disease characterized by a nephropathy involving mesangial sclerosis, XY pseudohermaphroditism, and/or Wilms tumor (WT). DDS patients are constitutionally heterozygous for exonic point mutations in WT1, which include mutations predicted to truncate the protein within the C-terminal zinc finger (ZF) region. We report that heterozygosity for a targeted murine Wt1 allele, Wt1 (tmT396), which truncates ZF3 at codon 396, induces mesangial sclerosis characteristic of DDS in adult heterozygous and chimeric mice. Male genital defects also were evident and there was a single case of Wilms tumor in which the transcript of the nontargeted allele showed an exon 9 skipping event, implying a causal link between Wt1 dysfunction and Wilms tumorigenesis in mice. However, the mutant WT1 (tmT396) protein accounted for only 5% of WT1 in both heterozygous embryonic stem cells and the WT. This has implications regarding the mechanism by which the mutant allele exerts its effect.

pseudohermaphroditism
Germline intronic and exonic mutations in the Wilms' tumour gene (WT1) affecting urogenital development.
Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare human developmental disorder affecting the urogenital system and leading to renal failure, intersex disorders and Wilms tumour. In this report, four individuals with this syndrome are described carrying germline point mutations in the Wilms tumour suppressor gene, WT1. Three of these mutations were in the zinc finger domains of WT1. The fourth occurred within intron 9, preventing splicing at one of the alternatively chosen splice donor sites of exon 9 when assayed in vitro. These results provide genetic evidence for distinct functional roles of the WT1 isoforms in urogenital development.. 

intersex disorders
Germline mutations in the Wilms' tumor suppressor gene are associated with abnormal urogenital development in Denys-Drash syndrome.
Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare human condition in which severe urogenital aberrations result in renal failure, pseudohermaphroditism, and Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma). To investigate its possible role, we have analyzed the coding exons of the Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1) for germline mutations. In ten independent cases of Denys-Drash syndrome, point mutations in the zinc finger domains of one WT1 gene copy were found. Nine of these mutations are found within exon 9 (zinc finger III); the remaining mutation is in exon 8 (zinc finger II). These mutations directly affect DNA sequence recognition. In two families analyzed, the mutations were shown to arise de novo. Wilms tumors from three individuals and one juvenile granulosa cell tumor demonstrate reduction to homozygosity for the mutated WT1 allele. Our results provide evidence of a direct role for WT1 in Denys-Drash syndrome and thus urogenital system development.. 

pseudohermaphroditism