Coats' disease of the retina (unilateral retinal telangiectasis) caused by somatic mutation in the NDP gene: a role for norrin in retinal angiogenesis.
Coats disease is characterized by abnormal retinal vascular development (so-called retinal telangiectasis) which results in massive intraretinal and subretinal lipid accumulation (exudative retinal detachment). The classical form of Coats disease is almost invariably isolated, unilateral and seen in males. A female with a unilateral variant of Coats disease gave birth to a son affected by Norrie disease. Both carried a missense mutation within the NDP gene on chromosome Xp11. 2 2. Subsequently analysis of the retinas of nine enucleated eyes from males with Coats disease demonstrated in one a somatic mutation in the NDP gene which was not present within non-retinal tissue. We suggest that Coats telangiectasis is secondary to somatic mutation in the NDP gene which results in a deficiency of norrin (the protein product of the NDP gene) within the developing retina. This supports recent observations that the protein is critical for normal retinal vasculogenesis. 

exudative retinal detachment
A single amino acid substitution (G103D) in the type II collagen triple helix produces Kniest dysplasia.
Kniest dysplasia is a moderately severe chondrodysplasia phenotype that results from mutations in the gene for type II collagen, COL2A1. Characteristics of the disorder include a short trunk and extremities, mid-face hypoplasia, cleft palate, myopia, retinal detachment, and hearing loss. Recently, deletions of all or part of exon 12 have been identified in individuals with Kniest dysplasia, suggesting that mutations within this region of the protein may primarily result in the Kniest dysplasia phenotype. We used SSCP to analyze an amplified genomic DNA fragment containing exon 12 from seven individuals with Kniest dysplasia. An abnormality was identified in one patient. DNA sequence analysis demonstrated that the patient was heterozygous for a G to A transition that implied substitution of glycine103 of the triple helical domain by aspartate. The mutation was not observed in DNA from either of the clinically unaffected parents of the proband. Protein microsequencing demonstrated expression of the abnormal allele in cartilage. These data demonstrate that point mutations which result in single amino acid substitutions can produce Kniest dysplasia and further support the hypothesis that alteration of a domain, which includes the region encoded by exon 12, in the type II collagen protein leads to this disorder.. 

retinal detachment