Macular dystrophy associated with mutations at codon 172 in the human retinal degeneration slow gene.
BACKGROUND  Recently, mutations in the retinal degeneration slow (rds) gene which codes for peripherin-rds have been implicated as a cause of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Because this gene is expressed in both rods and cones, mutations in the rds gene might be expected to cause degeneration affecting either the scotopic or photopic systems. Mutations at codon 172 of the rds gene have been identified in three families with autosomal dominantly inherited, progressive macular dystrophy. METHODS  Affected individuals underwent ophthalmic examination, scotopic perimetry, dark adaptometry, measurement of color-contrast sensitivity, and electroretinography to characterize the photoreceptor dysfunction. RESULTS  In all but one affected member, symptoms of progressive central visual loss developed in the third or fourth decade of life accompanied by central scotoma and well-demarcated atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium and choriocapillaris of the macula. In general, cone and rod thresholds were elevated, and color-contrast sensitivity was absent in the central visual field. Peripherally, the scotopic sensitivities were normal, as was the recovery from bleach. Cone electroretinograms were diminished in amplitude, and delayed in all affected adults except one. Rod electroretinograms were normal or near normal in amplitude, and had normal implicit times. Affected asymptomatic children had macular changes, abnormal color-contrast sensitivity, and reduced pattern and cone electroretinograms. CONCLUSION  These results indicate that mutations in the rds gene can be expressed as a macular dystrophy, with evidence of primary cone dysfunction and preservation of peripheral rod function.. 

central scotoma
Phenotypic variation including retinitis pigmentosa, pattern dystrophy, and fundus flavimaculatus in a single family with a deletion of codon 153 or 154 of the peripherin/RDS gene.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES  Mutations of the peripherin/RDS gene have been reported in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, pattern macular dystrophy, and retinitis punctata albescens. We report herein the occurrence of three separate phenotypes within a single family with a novel 3-base pair deletion of codon 153 or 154 of the peripherin/RDS gene. DESIGN  Case reports with clinical features, fluorescein angiography, kinetic perimetry, electrophysiological studies, and molecular genetics. SETTING  University medical centers. PATIENTS  A 75-year-old woman, her two daughters (aged 44 and 50 years), and her 49-year-old son were screened for peripherin/RDS mutations because of the presence of multiple phenotypes within the same family. RESULTS  The mother presented at age 63 years with a profoundly abnormal electroretinogram (ERG) and adult-onset retinitis pigmentosa that progressed dramatically over 12 years, with marked loss of peripheral visual field. One daughter developed pattern macular dystrophy at age 31 years. At age 44 years, her ERG was moderately abnormal but her clinical disease was limited to the macula. Another daughter presented at age 42 years with macular degeneration and over 10 years developed the clinical picture of fundus flavimaculatus. Her peripheral visual field was preserved but her ERG was moderately abnormal. The son had onset of macular degeneration at age 44 years. Pericentral scotomas were present and the ERG was markedly abnormal. Fluorescein angiography revealed punctate pigment epithelial transmission defects. CONCLUSIONS  A 3-base pair deletion of codon 153 or 154 of the peripherin/RDS gene can produce clinically disparate phenotypes even within the same family.. 

Pericentral scotomas