Genotype and phenotype in patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disease characterised by thymine-uraciluria in homozygous deficient patients and has been associated with a variable clinical phenotype. In order to understand the genetic and phenotypic basis for DPD deficiency, we have reviewed 17 families presenting 22 patients with complete deficiency of DPD. In this group of patients, 7 different mutations have been identified, including 2 deletions [295-298delTCAT, 1897delC], 1 splice-site mutation [IVS14 + 1G > A)] and 4 missense mutations (85T > C, 703C > T, 2658G > A, 2983G > T). Analysis of the prevalence of the various mutations among DPD patients has shown that the G-- > A point mutation in the invariant splice donor site is by far the most common (52%), whereas the other six mutations are less frequently observed. A large phenotypic variability has been observed, with convulsive disorders, motor retardation and mental retardation being the most abundant manifestations. A clear correlation between the genotype and phenotype has not been established. An altered beta-alanine, uracil and thymine homeostasis might underlie the various clinical abnormalities encountered in patients with DPD deficiency.

clinical abnormalities
Overgrowth of oral mucosa and facial skin, a novel feature of aspartylglucosaminuria.
Aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficiency of aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA). The main symptom is progressive mental retardation. A spectrum of different mutations has been reported in this disease, one missense mutation (Cys163Ser) being responsible for the majority of Finnish cases. We were able to examine 66 Finnish AGU patients for changes in the oral mucosa and 44 of these for changes in facial skin. Biopsy specimens of 16 oral lesions, 12 of them associated with the teeth, plus two facial lesions were studied histologically. Immunohistochemical staining for AGA was performed on 15 oral specimens. Skin was seborrhoeic in adolescent and adult patients, with erythema of the facial skin already common in childhood. Of 44 patients, nine (20%) had facial angiofibromas, tumours primarily occurring in association with tuberous sclerosis. Oedemic buccal mucosa (leucoedema) and gingival overgrowths were more frequent in AGU patients than in controls (p < 0. 001). Of 16 oral mucosal lesions studied histologically, 15 represented fibroepithelial or epithelial hyperplasias and were reactive in nature. Cytoplasmic vacuolisation was evident in four. Immunohistochemically, expression of AGA in AGU patients mucosal lesions did not differ from that seen in corresponding lesions of normal subjects. Thus, the high frequency of mucosal overgrowth in AGU patients does not appear to be directly associated with lysosomal storage or with alterations in the level of AGA expression. 

facial lesions