Mutation and haplotype studies of familial Mediterranean fever reveal new ancestral relationships and evidence for a high carrier frequency with reduced penetrance in the Ashkenazi Jewish population.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessive disorder characterized by episodes of fever with serositis or synovitis. The FMF gene (MEFV) was cloned recently, and four missense mutations were identified. Here we present data from non-Ashkenazi Jewish and Arab patients in whom we had not originally found mutations and from a new, more ethnically diverse panel. Among 90 symptomatic mutation-positive individuals, 11 mutations accounted for 79% of carrier chromosomes. Of the two mutations that are novel, one alters the same residue (680) as a previously known mutation, and the other (P369S) is located in exon 3. Consistent with another recent report, the E148Q mutation was observed in patients of several ethnicities and on multiple microsatellite haplotypes, but haplotype data indicate an ancestral relationships between non-Jewish Italian and Ashkenazi Jewish patients with FMF and other affected populations. Among approximately 200 anonymous Ashkenazi Jewish DNA samples, the MEFV carrier frequency was 21%, with E148Q the most common mutation. Several lines of evidence indicate reduced penetrance among Ashkenazi Jews, especially for E148Q, P369S, and K695R. Nevertheless, E148Q helps account for recessive inheritance in an Ashkenazi family previously reported as an unusual case of dominantly inherited FMF. The presence of three frequent MEFV mutations in multiple Mediterranean populations strongly suggests a heterozygote advantage in this geographic region.

synovitis
Isolation, genomic organization, and expression analysis of the mouse and rat homologs of MEFV, the gene for familial mediterranean fever.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessive disorder characterized by episodes of fever with serositis or synovitis. Recently the FMF gene (MEFV) was cloned; the protein product, pyrin/marenostrin, is thought to regulate inflammation in myeloid cells. In this manuscript we report the mouse and rat homologs of MEFV. The murine gene contains ten exons with a coding sequence of 2304 bp, while the rat homolog has nine exons with a coding sequence of 2253 bp. A considerable amino acid sequence homology was observed between the mouse and human (47. 6% identity and 65. 5% similarity) and between the mouse and rat genes (73. 5% identity and 82. 1% similarity). The predicted rodent proteins have several important domains and signals found in human pyrin, including a B-box zinc finger domain, Robbins-Dingwall nuclear localization signal, and coiled-coil domain. However, perhaps because of an ancient frame-shift mutation, neither the mouse nor the rat protein has an intact C-terminal B30. 2 domain, in which most FMF-associated mutations have been found in human MEFV. Nevertheless, like the human gene, mouse Mefv is expressed in peripheral blood granulocytes but not lymphocytes. Consistent with its expression in granulocytes, Mefv was detected at high levels in the primary follicles and marginal zones of the splenic white pulp. Mefv is localized on mouse Chromosome (Chr) 16, region A3-B1, extending a region of synteny with human Chr 16p13. 3. Development of knockout and knockin mouse models may provide further insights into the functional evolution of this gene. 

synovitis