Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency inhibits in vitro growth of Plasmodium falciparum.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD; EC 1. 1. 1. 49) -deficient red blood cells from male hemizygotes and female heterozygotes from the island of Sardinia were studied for their ability to support growth in vitro of the malaria-causing organism Plasmodium falciparum. Parasite growth was approximately one-third of normal in both hemi- and heterozygotes for G6PD deficiency. In Sardinians with the beta 0-thalassemia trait, parasite growth was normal except when G6PD deficiency occurred together with the thalassemia trait. The data support the hypothesis that G6PD deficiency may confer a selective advantage in a malarious area; the female heterozygote may be at a particular advantage because resistance to malaria equals that of male hemizygotes, but the risk of fatal hemolysis may be less. However, more female heterozygotes must be studied to confirm this hypothesis. No protective effect of beta 0-thalassemia trait could be demonstrated in vitro. 

thalassemia
Analbuminemia in an American Indian girl.
Analbuminemia was fortuitously detected in a nonedematous 12-year-old American Indian girl with atopic dermatitis, mild bronchial asthma, a mild seizure disorder, and hyperlipoproteinemia with a corneal arcus. Immunologic methods revealed trace amounts (17 mg/100 ml) of apparently normal serum albumin. The patients parents were remotely related. The pedigree and clinical findings were compatible with autosomal recessive transmission of analbuminemia. Heterozygotes had subnormal levels of serum albumin. The Gc-locus is closely linked to the structural albumin locus. Gc-protein levels were normal in the patient and together with normal chromosomal banding studies make it unlikely that a chromosomal deletion caused analbuminemia. Gc-types in the family were compatible with, but did not prove, linkage of analbuminemia to the Gc-locus. These findings suggest a " thalassemia " -like mutation for this disorder.. 

thalassemia