Inactivation of the Friedreich ataxia mouse gene leads to early embryonic lethality without iron accumulation.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common autosomal recessive ataxia, is caused in almost all cases by homozygous intronic expansions resulting in the loss of frataxin, a mitochondrial protein conserved through evolution, and involved in mitochondrial iron homeostasis. Yeast knockout models, and histological and biochemical data from patient heart biopsies or autopsies indicate that the frataxin defect causes a specific iron-sulfur protein deficiency and mitochondrial iron accumulation leading to the pathological changes. Affected human tissues are rarely available to further examine this hypothesis. To study the mechanism of the disease, we generated a mouse model by deletion of exon 4 leading to inactivation of the Frda gene product. We show that homozygous deletions cause embryonic lethality a few days after implantation, demonstrating an important role for frataxin during early development. These results suggest that the milder phenotype in humans is due to residual frataxin expression associated with the expansion mutations. Surprisingly, in the frataxin knockout mouse, no iron accumulation was observed during embryonic resorption, suggesting that cell death could be due to a mechanism independent of iron accumulation.. 

autosomal recessive ataxia
The gene for spinal cerebellar ataxia 3 (SCA3) is located in a region of approximately 3 cM on chromosome 14q24.3-q32.2.
SCA3, the gene for spinal cerebellar ataxia 3, was recently mapped to a 15-cM interval between D14S67 and D14S81 on chromosome 14q, by linkage analysis in two families of French ancestry. The SCA3 candidate region has now been refined by linkage analysis with four new microsatellite markers (D14S256, D14S291, D14S280, and AFM343vf1) in the same two families, in which 19 additional individuals were genotyped, and in a third French family. Combined two-point linkage analyses show that the new markers, D14S280 and AFM343vf1, are tightly linked to the SCA3 locus, with maximal lod scores, at recombination fraction, (theta) =. 00, of 7. 05 and 13. 70, respectively. Combined multipoint and recombinant haplotype analyses localize the SCA3 locus to a 3-cM interval flanked by D14S291 and D14S81. The same allele for D14S280 segregates with the disease locus in the three kindreds. This allele is frequent in the French population, however, and linkage disequilibrium is not clearly established. The SCA3 locus remains within the 29-cM region on 14q24. 3-q32. 2 containing the gene for the Machado-Joseph disease, which is clinically related to the phenotype determined by SCA3, but it cannot yet be concluded that both diseases result from alterations of the same gene 

spinal cerebellar ataxia
spinal cerebellar ataxia
G130V, a common FRDA point mutation, appears to have arisen from a common founder.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is the most common inherited ataxia. About 98% of mutant alleles have an expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat in intron 1 of the affected gene, FRDA. The other 2% are point mutations. Of the 17 point mutations so far described, three appear to be more common. One of these is the G130V mutation in exon 4 of FRDA. G130V, when present with an expanded GAA repeat on the other allele, is associated with an atypical FRDA phenotype. Haplotype analysis was undertaken on the four families who have been described with this mutation. The results suggest a common founder for this mutation. Although marked differences in extragenic marker haplotypes were seen in one family, similar intragenic haplotyping suggests the same mutation founder for this family with the differences explicable by two recombination events.. 

inherited ataxia
Friedreich ataxia: an overview.
Friedreich ataxia, an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease, is the most common of the inherited ataxias. The recent discovery of the gene that is mutated in this condition, FRDA, has led to rapid advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis of Friedreich ataxia. About 98% of mutant alleles have an expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat in intron 1 of the gene. This leads to reduced levels of the protein, frataxin. There is mounting evidence to suggest that Friedreich ataxia is the result of accumulation of iron in mitochondria leading to excess production of free radicals, which then results in cellular damage and death. Currently there is no known treatment that alters the natural course of the disease. The discovery of the FRDA gene and its possible function has raised hope that rational therapeutic strategies will be developed.. 

inherited ataxias
Age of the intronic GAA triplet repeat expansion mutation in Friedreich ataxia.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most frequently inherited ataxia, is due in the vast majority of cases to a large expansion of an intronic GAA repeat. Using linkage disequilibrium analysis based on haplotype data of seven polymorphic markers close to the frataxin gene, the age of FRDA founding mutational event (s) is estimated to be at least 682 +/-203 generations (95% confidence interval  564-801 g), a dating which is consistent with little or no negative selection and provides further evidence for an ancient spread of a pre-mutation (at-risk alleles) in western Europe.. 

inherited ataxia
Deficit of in vivo mitochondrial ATP production in patients with Friedreich ataxia.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common of the inherited ataxias, is an autosomal recessive degenerative disorder, characterized clinically by onset before the age of 25 of progressive gait and limb ataxia, absence of deep tendon reflexes, extensor plantar responses, and loss of position and vibration sense in the lower limbs. FRDA is caused by a GAA triplet expansion in the first intron of the FRDA gene on chromosome 9q13 in 97% of patients. The FRDA gene encodes a widely expressed 210-aa protein, frataxin, which is located in mitochondria and is severely reduced in FRDA patients. Frataxin function is still unknown but the knockout of the yeast frataxin homologue gene (YFH1) showed a severe defect of mitochondrial respiration and loss of mtDNA associated with elevated intramitochondrial iron. Here we report in vivo evidence of impaired mitochondrial respiration in skeletal muscle of FRDA patients. Using phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy we demonstrated a maximum rate of muscle mitochondrial ATP production (V (max)) below the normal range in all 12 FRDA patients and a strong negative correlation between mitochondrial V (max) and the number of GAA repeats in the smaller allele. Our results show that FRDA is a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial disorder affecting oxidative phosphorylation and give a rationale for treatments aimed to improve mitochondrial function in this condition.. 

inherited ataxias
Abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes in Atm mutant mice.
Motor incoordination, immune deficiencies, and an increased risk of cancer are the characteristic features of the hereditary disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Through gene targeting, we have generated a line of Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice. In contrast to other Atm mutant mice, Atm (y/y) mice show a lower incidence of thymic lymphoma and survive beyond a few months of age. Atm (y/y) mice exhibit deficits in motor learning indicative of cerebellar dysfunction. Even though we found no gross cerebellar degeneration in older Atm (y/y) animals, ectopic and abnormally differentiated Purkinje cells were apparent in mutant mice of all ages. These findings establish that some neuropathological abnormalities seen in A-T patients also are present in Atm mutant mice. In addition, we report a previously unrecognized effect of Atm deficiency on development or maintenance of CD4 (+) 8 (+) thymocytes. We discuss these findings in the context of the hypothesis that abnormal development of Purkinje cells and lymphocytes contributes to the pathogenesis of A-T.. 

cerebellar degeneration