A zinc finger truncation of murine WT1 results in the characteristic urogenital abnormalities of Denys-Drash syndrome .
The Wilms tumor -suppressor gene, WT1, plays a key role in urogenital development, and WT1 dysfunction is implicated in both neoplastic (Wilms tumor, mesothelioma, leukemias, and breast cancer) and nonneoplastic (glomerulosclerosis) disease. The analysis of diseases linked specifically with WT1 mutations, such as Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), can provide valuable insight concerning the role of WT1 in development and disease. DDS is a rare childhood disease characterized by a nephropathy involving mesangial sclerosis, XY pseudohermaphroditism, and/or Wilms tumor (WT). DDS patients are constitutionally heterozygous for exonic point mutations in WT1, which include mutations predicted to truncate the protein within the C-terminal zinc finger (ZF) region. We report that heterozygosity for a targeted murine Wt1 allele, Wt1 (tmT396), which truncates ZF3 at codon 396, induces mesangial sclerosis characteristic of DDS in adult heterozygous and chimeric mice. Male genital defects also were evident and there was a single case of Wilms tumor in which the transcript of the nontargeted allele showed an exon 9 skipping event, implying a causal link between Wt1 dysfunction and Wilms tumorigenesis in mice. However, the mutant WT1 (tmT396) protein accounted for only 5% of WT1 in both heterozygous embryonic stem cells and the WT. This has implications regarding the mechanism by which the mutant allele exerts its effect.

urogenital abnormalities
Constitutional mutations in the WT1 gene in patients with Denys-Drash syndrome.
The Denys-Drash syndrome is characterised by a typical nephropathy, genital abnormalities and also predisposes to the development of Wilms tumor. These patients eventually go into end stage renal failure. A candidate Wilms tumor gene, WT1, from the 11p13 chromosome region has recently been cloned. We have analysed the DNA sequence in constitutional cells from eight patients and have shown heterozygous mutations in six of them. Four of the mutations were in exon 9, all resulting in missense mutations. Three were at nucleotide position 1180 resulting in an arg > trp amino acid change. The other was at position 1186 converting an asp > asn in the predicted resultant protein. One patient had a missense mutation in exon 8, converting an arg > his. A single base pair insertion at nucleotide position 821 in exon 6 resulted in the generation of a premature stop codon in the last patient. We were unable to find a mutation in one patient despite complete sequencing of the genomic sequence of the gene. The last patient carried a constitutional deletion of the 11p13 region and no additional mutation was found. There was no obvious correlation between the type of mutation and phenotypic expression. These results further demonstrate that the WT1 gene is important in both the development of the kidney and the genito-urinary system.. 

genital abnormalities
A mutation in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of the FGD1 gene in an Italian family with faciogenital dysplasia (Aarskog-Scott syndrome).
Aarskog-Scott Syndrome (AAS) is an X-linked disorder characterised by short stature and multiple facial, limb and genital abnormalities. A gene, FGD1, altered in a patient with AAS phenotype, has been identified and found to encode a protein with homology to Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors (Rho/Rac GEF). However, since this original report on identification of a mutated FGD1 gene in an AAS patient, no additional mutations in the FGD1 gene have been described. We analysed 13 independent patients with clinical diagnosis of AAS. One patient presented a mutation that results in a nucleotide change in exon 10 of the FGD1 gene (G2559 > A) substituting a Gln for Arg in position 610. The mutation was found to segregate with the AAS phenotype in affected males and carrier females in the family of this patient. Interestingly, Arg-610 is located within one of the two pleckstrin homology (PH) domains of the FGD1 gene and it corresponds to a highly conserved residue which has been involved in InsP binding in PH domains of other proteins. The same residue is often mutated in the Brutons tyrosine kinase (Btk) gene in patients with an X-linked agammaglobulinemia. The Arg610Gln mutation represents the first case of a mutation in the PH domain of the FGD1 gene and additional evidence that mutations in PH domains can be associated to human diseases.. 

facial, limb and genital abnormalities
Inherited WT1 mutation in Denys-Drash syndrome.
Patients with the Denys-Drash syndrome (Wilms tumor, genital anomalies, and nephropathy) have been demonstrated to carry de novo constitutional mutations in WT1, the Wilms tumor gene at chromosome 11p13. We report three new cases, two carrying a previously described WT1 exon 9 mutation and one with a novel WT1 exon 8 mutation. However, unlike patients in previous reports, one of our three patients inherited the affected allele from his phenotypically unaffected father. This observation indicates that the WT1 exon 9 mutation affecting 394Arg demonstrated in over one-half of the patients with the Denys-Drash syndrome may exhibit incomplete penetrance. Consequently, familial studies in patients affected by this syndrome are recommended.. 

genital anomalies
Cloning of breakpoints of a chromosome translocation identifies the AN2 locus.
Chromosome translocations involving 11p13 have been associated with familial aniridia in two kindreds highlighting the chromosomal localization of the AN2 locus. This locus is also part of the WAGR complex (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities, and mental retardation). In one kindred, the translocation is associated with a deletion, and probes for this region were used to identify and clone the breakpoints of the translocation in the second kindred. Comparison of phage restriction maps exclude the presence of any sizable deletion in this case. Sequences at the chromosome 11 breakpoint are conserved in multiple species, suggesting that the translocation falls within the AN2 gene.. 

genitourinary abnormalities
Submicroscopic deletions at the WAGR locus, revealed by nonradioactive in situ hybridization.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with biotin-labeled probes mapping to 11p13 has been used for the molecular analysis of deletions of the WAGR (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities, and mental retardation) locus. We have detected a submicroscopic 11p13 deletion in a child with inherited aniridia who subsequently presented with Wilms tumor in a horseshoe kidney, only revealed at surgery. The mother, who has aniridia, was also found to carry a deletion including both the aniridia candidate gene (AN2) and the Wilms tumor predisposition gene (WT1). This is therefore a rare case of an inherited WAGR deletion. Wilms tumor has so far only been associated with sporadic de novo aniridia cases. We have shown that a cosmid probe for a candidate aniridia gene, homologous to the mouse Pax-6 gene, is deleted in cell lines from aniridia patients with previously characterized deletions at 11p13, while another cosmid marker mapping between two aniridia-associated translocation breakpoints (and hence a second candidate marker) is present on both chromosomes. These results support the Pax-6 homologue as a strong candidate for the AN2 gene. FISH with cosmid probes has proved to be a fast and reliable technique for the molecular analysis of deletions. It can be used with limited amounts of material and has strong potential for clinical applications.. 

genitourinary abnormalities
Germline mutations in the Wilms' tumor suppressor gene are associated with abnormal urogenital development in Denys-Drash syndrome.
Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare human condition in which severe urogenital aberrations result in renal failure, pseudohermaphroditism, and Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma). To investigate its possible role, we have analyzed the coding exons of the Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1) for germline mutations. In ten independent cases of Denys-Drash syndrome, point mutations in the zinc finger domains of one WT1 gene copy were found. Nine of these mutations are found within exon 9 (zinc finger III); the remaining mutation is in exon 8 (zinc finger II). These mutations directly affect DNA sequence recognition. In two families analyzed, the mutations were shown to arise de novo. Wilms tumors from three individuals and one juvenile granulosa cell tumor demonstrate reduction to homozygosity for the mutated WT1 allele. Our results provide evidence of a direct role for WT1 in Denys-Drash syndrome and thus urogenital system development.. 

urogenital aberrations