Treatment of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: effects of chenodeoxycholic acid, pravastatin, and combined use.
Treatments by oral administration of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) alone, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG) CoA reductase inhibitor (pravastatin) alone, and combination of the two drugs were attempted for 7 patients with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX). CDCA treatment at a dose of 300 mg/day reduced serum cholestanol (67. 3% reduction), lathosterol (50. 8%), campesterol (61. 7%) and sitosterol (12. 7%). However, the sera of the patients changed to be " atherogenic "; total cholesterol, triglyceride and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) -cholesterol were increased, while high-density lipoprotein (HDL) -cholesterol was decreased. Contrarily, pravastatin at a dose of 10 mg/day improved the sera of the patients to be markedly " anti-atherogenic ", but the reductions of cholestanol (30. 4%), lathosterol (44. 0%), campesterol (22. 9%) and sitosterol (9. 6%) were inadequate. Combined treatment with CDCA and pravastatin showed good overlapping of the effects of each drug alone. The sera of the patients were apparently more " anti-atherogenic " than those after CDCA treatment. Serum cholestanol concentration was still 2. 7 times higher than in controls, but the serum lathosterol level was within the normal range, indicating that the enhancement of overall cholesterol synthesis in the patients was sufficiently suppressed. Plant sterol levels were also within the normal range. The combination of CDCA and pravastatin was a good treatment for CTX, based on the improvement of serum lipoprotein metabolism, the suppression of cholesterol synthesis, and reductions of cholestanol and plant sterol levels. In all of 7 patients, the progression of disease was arrested, but dramatic effects on clinical manifestations, xanthoma, and electrophysiological findings could not be found after the treatment of these drugs 

xanthoma
Spinal xanthomatosis: a variant of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.
We describe seven Dutch patients from six families with a slowly progressive, mainly spinal cord syndrome that remained for many years the sole expression of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX). MRI demonstrated white matter abnormalities in the lateral and dorsal columns of the spinal cord. Post-mortem examination of one of the patients showed extensive myelin loss in these columns. An array of genotypes was found in these patients. We conclude that spinal xanthomatosis is a clinical and radiological separate entity of CTX that should be included in the differential diagnosis of chronic myelopathy.. 

Spinal xanthomatosis
spinal xanthomatosis
Genetics of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX): an autosomal recessive trait with high gene frequency in Sephardim of Moroccan origin.
We described 6 patients (from 3 families) affected with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX). All are Sephardic Jews of Moroccan extraction. In view of the small number of CTX patients diagnosed in the world (a total of 50 including our 6 patients), we are probably dealing with an ethnic subgroup with a high CTX gene frequency, which we have estimated to be 1/108. Since there are differences in expression in this disease, we recommend cholestanol study in cases of undiagnosed cataract or tendinous xanthomas in childhood or early adolescence. The diagnosis in CTX is important not only for genetic counseling, but also in veiw of possible treatment.. 

tendinous xanthomas