Aberrant splicing of the CHM gene is a significant cause of choroideremia.
Choroideremia (CHM) is an X-linked progressive degeneration of the choroid and retina. 12% of unrelated male patients carry deletions of the partially cloned CHM gene. In Finland, there are more than 120 living CHM patients belonging to eight apparently unrelated pedigrees. Molecular deletions involving the CHM gene have been detected in three families. We have screened the remaining five families for point mutations. In one large family a single nucleotide (T) insertion into the donor splice site of exon C leads to two aberrantly spliced mRNAs both producing a premature stop codon. The mutation can be assayed easily by amplification and digestion with Msel. Our findings provide additional evidence for the pathogenetic role of CHM mutations and provide a diagnostic tool for one fifth of the worlds known CHM patients.. 

X-linked progressive degeneration of the choroid and retina
Chromosome mapping of the rod photoreceptor cGMP phosphodiesterase beta-subunit gene in mouse and human: tight linkage to the Huntington disease region (4p16.3).
The retinal degeneration mouse (gene symbol, rd) is an animal model for certain forms of human hereditary retinopathies. Recent findings of a nonsense mutation in the rd mouse PDE beta-subunit gene (Pdeb) prompted us to investigate the chromosome locations of the mouse and human genes. We have utilized backcross analysis in mice to verify and define more precisely the location of the Pdeb locus 6. 1 +/- 2. 3 cM distal of Mgsa on mouse chromosome 5. We have determined that the human gene (PDEB) maps to 4p16. 3, very close to the Huntington disease (HD) region. Analysis of the comparative map for mice and humans shows that the mouse homologue of the HD gene will reside on chromosome 5. Linkage of the mouse Pdeb locus with other homologues in the human 4p16. 3 region is maintained but gene order is not, suggesting at least three possible sites for the corresponding mouse HD gene.

hereditary retinopathies