Family studies in Bechterew's syndrome (ankylosing spondylitis) III. Genetics.
The results of segregation analyses in 75 families where the proband had ankylosing spondylitis, are presented. Of the 278 adult, living first degree relatives, approximately 85% cooperated in the study. Clinical and radiographical examinations were performed and HLA typing was conducted. The results were in agreement with our hypothesis that ankylosing spondylitis is part of a syndrome where different genetic factors interact. Such known factors are HLA B27 associated disease susceptibility, susceptibility to psoriatic arthropathy and susceptibility to entero-arthropathy. Radiographical sacro-iliitis was restricted to HLA B27 positive relatives, and was more frequently found in relatives to probands with psoriasis than in relatives to probands without psoriasis. Environmental factors (intestinal bacteria) are known to trigger the disease at least in some persons, and we have postulated that all or most of them have the predisposition to develop disease. Thus, the syndrome has a multifactorial etiology. The phenotypic expressions of the different genetic predispositions involved, include sacro-iliitis, psoriasis, acute anterior uveitis, peripheral arthropathy and inflammatory bowel disease. We suggest the descriptive name HEREDITARY MULTIFOCAL RELAPSING INFLAMMATION (HEMRI) for this syndrome. Ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy and entero-arthropathy may be regarded as clinical sub-types of the syndrome.. 

psoriatic arthropathy
psoriatic arthropathy
HLA B27 and the genetics of ankylosing spondylitis.
One hundred and twenty-eight of 145 patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) were found to be HLA B27 positive. Five patients had evidence of a sero-negative peripheral arthritis resembling peripheral psoriatic arthritis and 3 of these were B27 negative. One further B27 negative patients had a sister with ankylosing spondylitis and ulcerative colitis and a mother with ulcerative colitis. There was evidence of a somewhat later age of onset of symptoms in B27 negative patients. These findings are interpreted as suggesting some degree of clinical and genetic heterogeneity in ankylosing spondylitis with genes for psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease being important in some individuals, particularly those who are B27 negative. Twenty-five first-degree relatives with ankylosing spondylitis were all B27 positive. The only instance of disassociation of B27 and spondylitis in a family was where the proband had ulcerative colitis as well as spondylitis. Of 13 B27 positive fathers 3 could be diagnosed as having definite ankylosing spondylitis (23%). These findings are thought to provide evidence against the concept that the gene for ankylosing spondylitis is not B27 but a closely linked gene and favour the occurrence of an environmental event affecting approximately one-fifth of B27 positive males to result in disease.. 

peripheral psoriatic arthritis