Familial deficiency of the seventh component of complement associated with recurrent bacteremic infections due to Neisseria.
The serum of a 29-year old woman with a recent episode of disseminated gonococcal infection and a history of meningococcal meningitis and arthritis as a child was found to lack serum hemolytic complement activity. The seventh component of complement (C7) was not detected by functional or immunochemical assays, whereas other components were normal by hemolytic and immunochemical assessment. Her fresh serum lacked complement-mediated bactericidal activity against Neisseria gonorrhoeae, but the addition of fresh normal serum or purified C7 restored bactericidal activity as well as hemolytic activity. The absence of functional C7 activity could not be accounted for on the basis of an inhibitor. Opsonization and generation of chemotactic activity functioned normally. Complete absence of C7 was also found in one sibling who had the clinical syndrome of meningococcal meningitis and arthritis  as a child and in this siblings clinically well eight-year-old son. HLA histocompatibility typing of the family members did not demonstrate evidence for genetic linkage of C7 deficiency with the major histocompatibility loci. This report represents the first cases of C7 deficiency associated with infectious complications and suggests that bactericidal activity may be important in host defense against bacteremic neisseria infections.

bacteremic infections due to Neisseria
bacteremic neisseria infections
Absence of the seventh component of complement in a patient with chronic meningococcemia presenting as vasculitis.
A previously healthy 40-year-old man presenting with fever, arthritis, and cutaneous vasculitis was found to have chronic meningococcemia. Evaluation of his complement system showed an absence of functional and antigenic C7, compatible with a complete deficiency of the seventh component of complement. Study of the patients family spanning four generations showed heterozygous deficiency of C7 in five members. Chronic neisserial infection can be associated with C7 deficiency and must be distinguished from other causes of cutaneous vasculitis.. 

Chronic neisserial infection
Recurrent meningococcal meningitis with absence of the sixth component of complement: an evaluation of underlying immunologic mechanisms.
A 51/2-year-old black girl with recurrent meningococcal meningitis and absence of the sixth component of complement (C6) is reported. To explore the pathogenesis of recurrent neisserial infections in C6 deficiency, a detailed analysis of her immune competence was conducted. Her serum had normal chemotactic, opsonic, alternative complement pathway, and specific antibody activity, but lacked complement-mediated bacteriolytic activity. In addition, her C6-deficient serum was indistinguishable from normal serum in a complement-dependent assay of phagocyte bactericidal activity. Absent bacteriolysis remains the only consistent defect associated with recurrent neisserial infections and absence of one of the late-acting complement components.. 

neisserial infections
neisserial infections
Recurrent meningitis in a patient with congenital deficiency of the C9 component of complement. First case of C9 deficiency in Europe.
We describe the first cases, to our knowledge, of C9 deficiency in Europe that were detected in a Swiss family, of which two members--one with a complete deficiency and the other with approximately half-normal C9 levels--experienced bacterial meningitis. The index patient, a 56-year-old white man with a history of purulent meningitis at the age of 23 years, presented with an acute meningococcal meningitis. No impairment of cellular immunity or immunoglobulin deficiency could be found. Complement assays showed a complete deficiency of the C9 component, while the other individual component levels were normal and the hemolytic activity (measured using the CH50 assay) was only slightly reduced. A family study revealed complete C9 deficiency in the patients healthy brother and half-normal C9 concentrations in his sister, his son (who also had experienced an episode of bacterial meningitis), and his niece, consistent with an inherited C9 deficiency. This first case of recurrent meningitis in a white patient with complete C9 deficiency suggests that this complement defect may also be a risk factor for bacterial, especially neisserial, infections.. 

bacterial, especially neisserial, infections