HFE mutations analysis in 711 hemochromatosis probands: evidence for S65C implication in mild form of hemochromatosis.
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a common autosomal recessive genetic disorder of iron metabolism. The HFE candidate gene encoding an HLA class I-like protein involved in HH was identified in 1996. Two missense mutations have been described  C282Y, accounting for 80% to 90% of HH chromosomes, and H63D, which is associated with a milder form of the disease representing 40% to 70% of non-C282Y HH chromosomes. We report here on the analysis of C282Y, H63D, and the 193A-- > T substitution leading to the S65C missense substitution in a large series of probands and controls. The results confirm that the C282Y substitution was the main mutation involved in hemochromatosis, accounting for 85% of carrier chromosomes, whereas the H63D substitution represented 39% of the HH chromosomes that did not carry the C282Y mutation. In addition, our screening showed that the S65C substitution was significantly enriched in probands with at least one chromosome without an assigned mutation. This substitution accounted for 7. 8% of HH chromosomes that were neither C282Y nor H63D. This enrichment of S65C among HH chromosomes suggests that the S65C substitution is associated with the mild form of hemochromatosis. 

hemochromatosis
Coincident Kaposi sarcoma and T-cell lymphoma in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
A 24 year old male with a history of eczema, recurrent mild infections, and thrombocytopenia consistent with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) presented with a mediastinal mass, generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and severe thrombocytopenia. Studies of immune function including immunoglobulin levels and T-cell subsets were normal. Furthermore, his T lymphocytes proliferated normally in response to phytohemagglutinin, concanavalin A, and the combination of neuraminidase/galactose oxidase. However, their proliferative responses to anti-CD43 antibody and periodate were diminished, consistent with the clinical diagnosis of WAS. An initial inguinal lymph node biopsy surprisingly revealed Kaposi sarcoma. However, following splenectomy to increase the platelet count, biopsy of the mediastinal mass revealed T-cell large cell lymphoma. Studies of biopsied tissue for the presence of Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were negative, as were studies of blood, including the polymerase chain reaction, for the presence of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This is the first report of Kaposi sarcoma arising in a patient with a congenital immunodeficiency syndrome. Although Kaposi sarcoma can arise in the face of the severe immunosuppression that follows allograft transplantation and in patients infected with HIV, we postulate that longevity in the face of mild immunosuppression was the major factor in the development of Kaposi sarcoma in this patient.. 

T-cell lymphoma
T-cell large cell lymphoma