beta-galactosidase gene mutations affecting the lysosomal enzyme and the elastin-binding protein in GM1-gangliosidosis patients with cardiac involvement.
GM1-gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficiency of acid beta-galactosidase (GLB1). We report five new beta-galactosidase gene mutations in nine Italian patients and one fetus, segregating in seven unrelated families. Six of the eight patients with the infantile, severe form of the disease presented cardiac involvement, a feature rarely associated with GM1-gangliosidosis. Molecular analysis of the patients RNA and DNA identified two new RNA splicing defects, three new and three previously described amino acid substitutions. Interestingly, all patients with cardiac involvement were homozygous for one of these mutations  R59H, Y591C, Y591N, or IVS14-2A > G. In contrast, all other patients were compound heterozygous for one of the following mutations  R201H, R482H, G579D, IVS8 + 2T > C. Although we could not directly correlate the presence of cardiac abnormalities with specific genetic lesions, the mutations identified in patients with cardiomyopathy fell in the GLB1 cDNA region common to the lysosomal enzyme and the Hbeta-Gal-related protein, also known as the elastin binding protein (EBP). Consequently, both molecules are affected by the mutations, and they may contribute differently to the occurrence of specific clinical manifestations.. 

cardiac abnormalities
Early onset of X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy in a boy with emerin gene deletion.
A boy developed contractures of the Achilles tendons at 3 years and of the postcervical muscles at 7 years, although neither contractures of the elbows nor cardiac abnormality were recognized by the age of 9 years. Muscle computed tomography scanning revealed changes characteristic of muscle involvement. Emerin was not detected in the biopsied muscle, and RT-PCR and PCR-based genomic DNA analyses of the emerin gene demonstrated no amplification product in the patient. These results confirmed the diagnosis of X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), and reinforce the necessity of molecular genetic diagnosis of the membrane protein emerin in younger patients with possible EDMD before appearance of the typical symptoms, to avoid sudden cardiac death.. 

cardiac abnormality