Beta-catenin accumulation and mutation of the CTNNB1 gene in hepatoblastoma.
Hepatoblastoma is a rare malignant tumor of the liver that occurs in children at an average age of 2 to 3 years. Epidemiologic studies have shown an increased frequency of this tumor type in families affected by adenomatous polyposis coli. In addition to the epidemiologic data, molecular genetic studies suggest that inactivation of the APC tumor suppressor may be involved in hepatoblastoma tumorigenesis. A major function of APC is the downregulation of beta-catenin, a transcription-activating protein with oncogenic potential. In an ongoing immunohistochemical study of beta-catenin expression in sporadic cases of tumor types that are associated with adenomatous polyposis coli, we observed increased beta-catenin levels in the cytoplasm and in the nuclei of three investigated hepatoblastomas. Sequencing of exon 3 of the beta-catenin gene (CTNNB1) revealed an activating mutation in one of the tumor samples. Our data indicate for the first time that beta-catenin accumulation may play a role in the development of hepatoblastoma and that activating mutations of the beta-catenin gene may substitute biallelic APC inactivation in this tumor type. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 25  399-402, 1999.. 

malignant tumor of the liver
A common molecular basis for rearrangement disorders on chromosome 22q11.
The chromosome 22q11 region is susceptible to rearrangements that are associated with congenital anomaly disorders and malignant tumors. Three congenital anomaly disorders, cat-eye syndrome, der () syndrome and velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) are associated with tetrasomy, trisomy or monosomy, respectively, for part of chromosome 22q11. VCFS/DGS is the most common syndrome associated with 22q11 rearrangements. In order to determine whether there are particular regions on 22q11 that are prone to rearrangements, the deletion end-points in a large number of VCFS/DGS patients were defined by haplotype analysis. Most VCFS/DGS patients have a similar 3 Mb deletion, some have a nested distal deletion breakpoint resulting in a 1. 5 Mb deletion and a few rare patients have unique deletions or translocations. The high prevalence of the disorder in the population and the fact that most cases occur sporadically suggest that sequences at or near the breakpoints confer susceptibility to chromosome rearrangements. To investigate this hypothesis, we developed hamster-human somatic hybrid cell lines from VCFS/DGS patients with all three classes of deletions and we now show that the breakpoints occur within similar low copy repeats, termed LCR22s. To support this idea further, we identified a family that carries an interstitial duplication of the same 3 Mb region that is deleted in VCFS/DGS patients. We present models to explain how the LCR22s can mediate different homologous recombination events, thereby generating a number of rearrangements that are associated with congenital anomaly disorders. We identified five additional copies of the LCR22 on 22q11 that may mediate other rearrangements leading to disease. 

malignant tumors