Three novel mutations in five unrelated subjects with hereditary protein S deficiency type I.
A panel of eight unrelated subjects with inherited type I protein S deficiency was screened for mutations in the PROS1 gene. In five subjects an abnormality was found but mutations were not detected in the remaining three subjects. Two subjects shared a G-- > A transition at position + 5 of the donor splice site consensus sequence of intron 10. Also in two subjects an A-- > T transversion was detected in the stopcodon of the PROS1 gene; this transversion predicts a protein S molecule that is extended by 14 amino acids. The fifth subject was found to possess two sequence abnormalities. One allele carried a G-- > A transition near the donor splice junction of intron 2, but this abnormality is probably neutral, since it was inherited from the parent with normal protein S antigen levels. In the other allele a single T insertion in codon -25 was found. Analysis of platelet RNA showed that only the mRNA with the A-- > T mutation in the stopcodon is present in amounts comparable to wildtype RNA. mRNA from the alleles with the other two mutations was either undetectable or present in greatly reduced amounts. The latter indicates that a mRNA based approach is not feasible for the genetic analysis of protein S deficiency type I.. 

protein S deficiency type I
type I protein S deficiency
protein S deficiency type I
Genetic analysis, phenotypic diagnosis, and risk of venous thrombosis in families with inherited deficiencies of protein S.
Protein S deficiency is a recognized risk factor for venous thrombosis. Of all the inherited thrombophilic conditions, it remains the most difficult to diagnose because of phenotypic variability, which can lead to inconclusive results. We have overcome this problem by studying a cohort of patients from a single center where the diagnosis was confirmed at the genetic level. Twenty-eight index patients with protein S deficiency and a PROS1 gene defect were studied, together with 109 first-degree relatives. To avoid selection bias, we confined analysis of total and free protein S levels and thrombotic risk to the patients relatives. In this group of relatives, a low free protein S level was the most reliable predictor of a PROS1 gene defect (sensitivity 97. 7%, specificity 100%). First-degree relatives with a PROS1 gene defect had a 5. 0-fold higher risk of thrombosis (95% confidence interval, 1. 5-16. 8) than those with a normal PROS1 gene and no other recognized thrombophilic defect. Although pregnancy/puerperium and immobility/trauma were important precipitating factors for thrombosis, almost half of the events were spontaneous. Relatives with splice-site or major structural defects in the PROS1 gene were more likely to have had a thrombotic event and had significantly lower total and free protein S levels than those relatives having missense mutations. We conclude that persons with PROS1 gene defects and protein S deficiency are at increased risk of thrombosis and that free protein S estimation offers the most reliable way of diagnosing the deficiency. (Blood. 2000; 95  1935-1941).

deficiencies of protein S
Protein S deficiency
protein S deficiency
protein S deficiency