Changes at P183 of emerin weaken its protein-protein interactions resulting in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy characterized by early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and spine, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and cardiomyopathy associated with cardiac conduction defects. The emerin gene has been mapped to Xq28 and encodes a 34-kDa serine-rich protein, emerin, which has been localized to the nuclear envelope in a wide variety of tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mutations spanning the emerin gene have been identified in patients with EDMD. We present here the effect, on emerin protein expression, of two missense mutations identified in unrelated EDMD patients. These alterations predict the replacement of a proline residue at position 183 with either a histidine or a threonine. Biochemical analysis has demonstrated that the mobility and expression levels of the mutant forms of emerin are indistinguishable from that of wild-type emerin, but that they have weakened interactions with nuclear lamina components. In comparison with the usual EDMD phenotype, patients with P183 missense mutations have a later age at onset of first symptoms, elbow contractures, ankle contractures, upper limb weakness and lower limb weakness, but there is no difference for the age at onset of cardiac involvement. This is the first report of protein studies on patients with missense mutations resulting in the clinical features of EDMD. These studies demonstrate the importance of proline 183 for the proper structure/function of emerin.. 

weakness
upper limb weakness
lower limb weakness
Genotype-phenotype analysis in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and identification of a missense mutation associated with a milder phenotype.
Direct sequencing of the emerin gene in 22 families with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EMD) revealed mutations in 21 (95%), confirming that emerin mutations can be identified in the majority of families with X-linked EMD. Most emerin mutations result in absence of the protein. In this study three mutations (a missense mutation Pro183Thr and two in-frame deletions removing residues 95-99 and 236-241, respectively) were unusual in being associated with expression of mutant protein. The phenotype in these families was compared in detail with the clinical features in cases with typical null mutations. For the in-frame deletions there were no significant differences. In the family with the missense mutation the phenotype was milder. Age at onset was later for first symptoms and for development of ankle contractures and muscle weakness. These findings have diagnostic implications as well as pointing to functionally important regions of the emerin protein.. 

muscle weakness
Detection of an unstable fragment of DNA specific to individuals with myotonic dystrophy.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is the most common form of adult muscular dystrophy, with a prevalence of 2-14 per 100, 000 individuals. The disease is characterized by progressive muscle weakness and sustained muscle contraction, often with a wide range of accompanying symptoms. The age at onset and severity of the disease show extreme variation, both within and between families. Despite its clinical variability, this dominant condition segregates as a single locus at chromosome 19q13. 3 in every population studied. It is flanked by the tightly linked genetic markers ERCC1 proximally and D19S51 distally; these define the DM critical region. We report the isolation of an expressed sequence from this region which detects a DNA fragment that is larger in affected individuals than in normal siblings or unaffected controls. The size of this fragment varies between affected siblings, and increases in size through generations in parallel with increasing severity of the disease. We postulate that this unstable DNA sequence is the molecular feature that underlies DM. 

muscle weakness
Complex glycerol kinase deficiency: molecular-genetic, cytogenetic, and clinical studies of five Japanese patients.
Five male Japanese patients with complex glycerol kinase deficiency (CGKD) and their relatives were studied clinically, cytogenetically, and molecular-genetically. All patients had muscular dystrophy or muscle weakness, mental retardation, congenital adrenal hypoplasia, and glycerol kinase deficiency. High-resolution GTG-banded chromosomes showed a microdeletion in the Xp21 region in all four patients examined and in all five mothers. Southern hybridizations, after digestions by restriction endonucleases, with various cloned DNAs (D2, 99-6, B24, C7, L1-4, cDMD13-14, J66-HI, P20, J-Bir, ERT87-30, ERT87-15, ERT87-8, ERT87-1, XJ-1. 1, 754, cx5. 7, and OTC-1) that are located around Xp21 also showed a deletion in the genome of all patients and mothers. Although the deletion differed in size among patients, a segment commonly absent was located between the genomic sequences corresponding to L1-4 and cDMD13-14. This finding indicated that the gene coding for glycerol kinase (GK) is located within this segment. A comparison of the clinical manifestations of the present five patients and reported CGKD or Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients with DNA deletion suggests the existence of a certain gene responsible for gonadotropin deficiency (GTD). The result of the present study and results of previous studies suggest that genes for ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), DMD, and GK and putative genes responsible for congenital adrenal hypoplasia (AHC) and GTD are arranged from telomere to centromere as pter--GTD--AHC--GK--DMD--OTC--cen 

muscle weakness