Gardner syndrome in a boy with interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5.
We described a 15-year-old boy with Gardner syndrome (GS), mental retardation, and craniofacial abnormalities. High-resolution banding analysis showed an interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5 (q22. 1----q31 1----q31. 1). The breakpoints in the present case and in 3 previously reported 5q- patients with adenomatous polyposis coli suggest that the gene responsible for GS/or familial polyposis coli (FPC) is in the 5q22 region, a result consistent with the findings of linkage studies 

craniofacial abnormalities
A mutation in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of the FGD1 gene in an Italian family with faciogenital dysplasia (Aarskog-Scott syndrome).
Aarskog-Scott Syndrome (AAS) is an X-linked disorder characterised by short stature and multiple facial, limb and genital abnormalities. A gene, FGD1, altered in a patient with AAS phenotype, has been identified and found to encode a protein with homology to Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors (Rho/Rac GEF). However, since this original report on identification of a mutated FGD1 gene in an AAS patient, no additional mutations in the FGD1 gene have been described. We analysed 13 independent patients with clinical diagnosis of AAS. One patient presented a mutation that results in a nucleotide change in exon 10 of the FGD1 gene (G2559 > A) substituting a Gln for Arg in position 610. The mutation was found to segregate with the AAS phenotype in affected males and carrier females in the family of this patient. Interestingly, Arg-610 is located within one of the two pleckstrin homology (PH) domains of the FGD1 gene and it corresponds to a highly conserved residue which has been involved in InsP binding in PH domains of other proteins. The same residue is often mutated in the Brutons tyrosine kinase (Btk) gene in patients with an X-linked agammaglobulinemia. The Arg610Gln mutation represents the first case of a mutation in the PH domain of the FGD1 gene and additional evidence that mutations in PH domains can be associated to human diseases.. 

facial, limb and genital abnormalities
PAX6 gene dosage effect in a family with congenital cataracts, aniridia, anophthalmia and central nervous system defects.
The human eye malformation aniridia results from haploinsufficiency of PAX6, a paired box DNA-binding protein. To study this dosage effect, we characterized two PAX6 mutations in a family segregating aniridia and a milder syndrome consisting of congenital cataracts and late onset corneal dystrophy. The nonsense mutations, at codons 103 and 353, truncate PAX6 within the N-terminal paired and C-terminal PST domains, respectively. The wild-type PST domain activates transcription autonomously and the mutant form has partial activity. A compound heterozygote had severe craniofacial and central nervous system defects and no eyes. The pattern of malformations is similar to that in homozygous Sey mice and suggests a critical role for PAX6 in controlling the migration and differentiation of specific neuronal progenitor cells in the brain.. 

craniofacial and central nervous system defects
Confirmation of linkage of Van der Woude syndrome to chromosome 1q32: evidence of association with STR alleles suggests possible unique origin of the disease mutation.
Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) is an autosomal dominant craniofacial disorder with high penetrance and variable expression. Its clinical features are variably expressed, but include cleft lip and/or cleft palate, lip pits and hypodontia. All VWS families studied to date map the disease gene to a < 2 cM region of chromosome 1q32, with no evidence of locus heterogeneity. The aim of this study is to refine the localization of the VWS gene and to further assess possible heterogeneity. We analyzed four multiplex VWS families. All available members were clinically assessed and genotyped for 19 short tandem repeat markers on chromosome 1 in the VWS candidate gene region. We performed two-point and multipoint limit of detection (LOD) score analyses using a high penetrance autosomal dominant model. All families showed positive LOD scores without any recombination in the candidate region. The largest two-point LOD score was 5. 87 87. Our assay method for short tandem repeat (STR) markers provided highly accurate size estimation of marker allele fragment sizes, and therefore enabled us to determine the specific alleles segregating with the VWS gene in each of our four families. We observed a striking pattern of STR allele sharing at several closely linked loci among our four Caucasian VWS families recruited at three different locations in the US. These results suggest the possibility of a unique origin for a mutation responsible for many or most cases of VWS. 

autosomal dominant craniofacial disorder