The murine homologues of the Huntington disease gene (Hdh) and the alpha-adducin gene (Add1) map to mouse chromosome 5 within a region of conserved synteny with human chromosome 4p16.3.
Huntington disease (HD) is a severe autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder associated with a novel gene (IT15). Recently, we reported the cloning of Hdh, the murine homologue of IT15. Here, using an interspecific backcross, we have mapped both Hdh and the mouse homologue of human alpha-adducin (Add1), a membrane-associated cytoskeletal protein gene. Both of these genes map in the same position on mouse chromosome 5 in a region associated with ancestral chromosomal rearrangements and show no recombination with D5H4S43, D5H4S115, and D5H4S62, the murine homologues of D4S43, D4S115, and D4S62, respectively. Further mapping studies of humans, mice, and other mammalian species should reveal the nature of the rearrangements affecting this chromosomal segment during mammalian evolution.. 

autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder
Iron-dependent self-assembly of recombinant yeast frataxin: implications for Friedreich ataxia.
Frataxin deficiency is the primary cause of Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), an autosomal recessive cardiodegenerative and neurodegenerative disease. Frataxin is a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein that is widely conserved among eukaryotes. Genetic inactivation of the yeast frataxin homologue (Yfh1p) results in mitochondrial iron accumulation and hypersensitivity to oxidative stress. Increased iron deposition and evidence of oxidative damage have also been observed in cardiac tissue and cultured fibroblasts from patients with FRDA. These findings indicate that frataxin is essential for mitochondrial iron homeostasis and protection from iron-induced formation of free radicals. The functional mechanism of frataxin, however, is still unknown. We have expressed the mature form of Yfh1p (mYfh1p) in Escherichia coli and have analyzed its function in vitro. Isolated mYfh1p is a soluble monomer (13, 783 Da) that contains no iron and shows no significant tendency to self-associate. Aerobic addition of ferrous iron to mYfh1p results in assembly of regular spherical multimers with a molecular mass of approximately 1. 1 MDa (megadaltons) and a diameter of 13 +/-2 nm. Each multimer consists of approximately 60 subunits and can sequester > 3, 000 atoms of iron. Titration of mYfh1p with increasing iron concentrations supports a stepwise mechanism of multimer assembly. Sequential addition of an iron chelator and a reducing agent results in quantitative iron release with concomitant disassembly of the multimer, indicating that mYfh1p sequesters iron in an available form. In yeast mitochondria, native mYfh1p exists as monomer and a higher-order species with a molecular weight > 600, 000. After addition of (55) Fe to the medium, immunoprecipitates of this species contain > 16 atoms of (55) Fe per molecule of mYfh1p. We propose that iron-dependent self-assembly of recombinant mYfh1p reflects a physiological role for frataxin in mitochondrial iron sequestration and bioavailability.. 

autosomal recessive cardiodegenerative and neurodegenerative disease
Characterization of the rat spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 gene.
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) belongs to a group of clinically and genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia. The disease-causing mutation has recently been identified as an unstable and expanded (CAG) n trinucleotide repeat in a novel gene of unknown function. In Caucasians, repeat expansions in the MJD1 gene have also been found in patients with the clinically distinct autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3). In order to gain insight into the biology of the MJD1/SCA3 gene we cloned the rat homologue and studied its expression. The rat and human ataxin-3 genes are highly homologous with an overall sequence identity of approximately 88%. However, the C-terminal end of the putative protein differs strongly from the published human sequence. The (CAG) n block in the rat cDNA consists of just three interrupted units suggesting that a long polyglutamine stretch is not essential for the normal function of the ataxin-3 protein in rodents. The expression pattern of the SCA3 gene in various rat and human tissues was investigated by Northern blot analyses. The mature transcript is approximately 6 kb in length. In rat testis, a smaller transcript of 1. 3 kb was identified. Transcription of rsca3 was detected in most rat tissues including brain. Analyzing the expression level of the SCA3 gene in several human brain sections revealed no significant higher mRNA level in regions predominantly affected in MJD. Thus additional molecules and/or regulatory events are necessary to explain the exclusive degeneration of certain brain areas. 

neurodegenerative disorders
Genomic organization of the adrenoleukodystrophy gene.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), the most frequent peroxisomal disorder, is a severe neurodegenerative disease associated with an impairment of very long chain fatty acids beta-oxidation. We have recently identified by positional cloning the gene responsible for ALD, located in Xq28. It encodes a new member of the " ABC " superfamily of membrane-associated transporters that shows, in particular, significant homology to the 70-kDa peroxisomal membrane protein (PMP70). We report here a detailed characterization of the ALD gene structure. It extends over 21 kb and consists of 10 exons. To facilitate the detection of mutations in ALD patients, we have determined the intronic sequences flanking the exons as well as the sequence of the 3 untranslated region and of the immediate 5 promoter region. Sequences present in distal exons cross-hybridize strongly to additional sequences in the human genome. The ALD gene has been positioned on a pulsed-field map between DXS15 and the L1CAM gene, about 650 kb upstream from the color pigment genes. The frequent occurrence of color vision anomalies observed in patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy (the adult onset form of ALD) thus does not represent a contiguous gene syndrome but a secondary manifestation of ALD.. 

neurodegenerative disease
Atm and Bax cooperate in ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis in the central nervous system.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a hereditary multisystemic disease resulting from mutations of ataxia telangiectasia, mutated (ATM) and is characterized by neurodegeneration, cancer, immune defects, and hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation. The molecular details of ATM function in the nervous system are unclear, although the neurological lesion in ataxia-telangiectasia becomes apparent early in life, suggesting a developmental origin. The central nervous system (CNS) of Atm-null mice shows a pronounced defect in apoptosis induced by genotoxic stress, suggesting ATM functions to eliminate neurons with excessive genomic damage. Here, we report that the death effector Bax is required for a large proportion of Atm-dependent apoptosis in the developing CNS after ionizing radiation (IR). Although many of the same regions of the CNS in both Bax-/- and Atm-/- mice were radioresistant, mice nullizygous for both Bax and Atm showed additional reduction in IR-induced apoptosis in the CNS. Therefore, although the major IR-induced apoptotic pathway in the CNS requires Atm and Bax, a p53-dependent collateral pathway exists that has both Atm- and Bax-independent branches. Further, Atm- and Bax-dependent apoptosis in the CNS also required caspase-3 activation. These data implicate Bax and caspase-3 as death effectors in neurodegenerative pathways.. 

neurodegeneration
neurological lesion
Loss of the ataxia-telangiectasia gene product causes oxidative damage in target organs.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is characterized by a markedly increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation, increased incidence of cancer, and neurodegeneration, especially of the cerebellar Purkinje cells. Ionizing radiation oxidizes macromolecules and causes tissue damage through the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). We therefore hypothesized that A-T is due to oxidative damage resulting from loss of function of the A-T gene product. To assess this hypothesis, we employed an animal model of A-T, the mouse with a disrupted Atm gene. We show that organs which develop pathologic changes in the Atm-deficient mice are targets of oxidative damage, and that cerebellar Purkinje cells are particularly affected. These observations provide a mechanistic basis for the A-T phenotype and lay a rational foundation for therapeutic intervention.. 

neurodegeneration
Age of onset in Huntington disease : sex specific influence of apolipoprotein E genotype and normal CAG repeat length.
Age of onset (AO) of Huntington disease (HD) is known to be correlated with the length of an expanded CAG repeat in the HD gene. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, in turn, is known to influence AO in Alzheimer disease, rendering the APOE gene a likely candidate to affect AO in other neurological diseases too. We therefore determined APOE genotype and normal CAG repeat length in the HD gene for 138 HD patients who were previously analysed with respect to CAG repeat length. Genotyping for APOE was performed blind to clinical information. In addition to highlighting the effect of the normal repeat length upon AO in maternally inherited HD and in male patients, we show that the APOE epsilon2epsilon3 genotype is associated with significantly earlier AO in males than in females. Such a sex difference in AO was not apparent for any of the other APOE genotypes. Our findings suggest that subtle differences in the course of the neurodegeneration  in HD  may allow interacting genes to exert gender specific effects upon AO.

neurodegeneration
Late infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy in Israel.
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy (MLD) is a neurodegenerative disease in which the lysosomal enzyme, Aryl sulfatase A (ARSA) is deficient. The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and its frequency is estimated to be 1/40, 000 live births. The gene of ARSA has been cloned and up to now eight mutations causing MLD have been reported. Another mutation, PD, leads to the deficiency of the enzyme in vitro (pseudodeficiency) without any known clinical effect. The PD mutation is frequent in all populations. In Israel, late infantile MLD was found to be very frequent in a small Jewish isolate, the Habbanite Jews (1/75 live births). The molecular analysis demonstrated that in the Habbanite population, the mutation occurred on an allele with the PD mutation. The loss of ARSA activity is due to a point mutation C > T leading to a change of proline to leucine. MLD is also frequent among Moslem Arabs in Jerusalem. The mutation is a transition G > A destroying the splice donor site of exon 2. This mutation has been reported in patients with the late infantile MLD from different ethnic groups. The Christian Arabs in Israel also have a high incidence of the disease (1/10, 000 live births); the mutation in this population is still unknown. Knowledge of the different mutations causing MLD in these defined populations will allow a carrier screening program to be carried out and prevent the birth of additional affected children.. 

neurodegenerative disease
Marked phenotypic heterogeneity associated with expansion of a CAG repeat sequence at the spinocerebellar ataxia 3/Machado-Joseph disease locus.
The spinocerebellar ataxia 3 locus (SCA3) for type I autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (ADCA type I), a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders, has been mapped to chromosome 14q32. 1 1. ADCA type I patients from families segregating SCA3 share clinical features in common with those with Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), the gene of which maps to the same region. We show here that the disease gene segregating in each of three French ADCA type I kindreds and in a French family with neuropathological findings suggesting the ataxochoreic form of dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy carries an expanded CAG repeat sequence located at the same locus as that for MJD. Analysis of the mutation in these families shows a strong negative correlation between size of the expanded CAG repeat and age at onset of clinical disease. Instability of the expanded triplet repeat was not found to be affected by sex of the parent transmitting the mutation. Evidence was found for somatic and gonadal mosaicism for alleles carrying expanded trinucleotide repeats. 

neurodegenerative disorders
Recombinations in individuals homozygous by descent localize the Friedreich ataxia locus in a cloned 450-kb interval.
The locus for Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), a severe neurodegenerative disease, is tightly linked to markers D9S5 and D9S15, and analysis of rare recombination events has suggested the order cen-FRDA-D9S5-D9S15-qter. We report here the construction of a YAC contig extending 800 kb centromeric to D9S5 and the isolation of five new microsatellite markers from this region. In order to map these markers with respect to the FRDA locus, all within a 1-cM confidence interval, we sought to increase the genetic information of available FRDA families by considering homozygosity by descent and association with founder haplotypes in isolated populations. This approach allowed us to identify one phase-known recombination and one probable historic recombination on haplotypes from Reunion Island patients, both of which place three of the five markers proximal to FRDA. This represents the first identification of close FRDA flanking markers on the centromeric side. The two other markers allowed us to narrow the breakpoint of a previously identified distal recombination that is > 180 kb from D9S5 (26P). Taken together, the results place the FRDA locus in a 450-kb interval, which is small enough for direct search of candidate genes. A detailed rare cutter restriction map and a cosmid contig covering this interval were constructed and should facilitate the search of genes in this region.. 

neurodegenerative disease
Deficit of in vivo mitochondrial ATP production in patients with Friedreich ataxia.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common of the inherited ataxias, is an autosomal recessive degenerative disorder, characterized clinically by onset before the age of 25 of progressive gait and limb ataxia, absence of deep tendon reflexes, extensor plantar responses, and loss of position and vibration sense in the lower limbs. FRDA is caused by a GAA triplet expansion in the first intron of the FRDA gene on chromosome 9q13 in 97% of patients. The FRDA gene encodes a widely expressed 210-aa protein, frataxin, which is located in mitochondria and is severely reduced in FRDA patients. Frataxin function is still unknown but the knockout of the yeast frataxin homologue gene (YFH1) showed a severe defect of mitochondrial respiration and loss of mtDNA associated with elevated intramitochondrial iron. Here we report in vivo evidence of impaired mitochondrial respiration in skeletal muscle of FRDA patients. Using phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy we demonstrated a maximum rate of muscle mitochondrial ATP production (V (max)) below the normal range in all 12 FRDA patients and a strong negative correlation between mitochondrial V (max) and the number of GAA repeats in the smaller allele. Our results show that FRDA is a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial disorder affecting oxidative phosphorylation and give a rationale for treatments aimed to improve mitochondrial function in this condition.. 

autosomal recessive degenerative disorder
Bone marrow transplant in adrenoleukodystrophy.
An allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT) from a normal HLA identical sibling donor was performed in a 13-year-old boy with rapidly progressive adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). Engraftment and complete hematologic recovery occurred within 4 weeks, but neurologic deterioration continued. The patient died of an adenovirus infection 141 days after BMT. ALD is characterized by abnormally high plasma levels of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) as a result of impaired capacity to degrade them. Ten days after BMT, the white blood cell VLCFA levels and enzyme activity became normal; after 3 months, there was progressive reduction of plasma VLCFA to levels only slightly above normal.. 

neurologic deterioration