Clinical and molecular genetics of primary dystonias.
Primary dystonias are movement disorders with dystonia as a major symptom. They are frequently inherited as Mendelian traits. There are at least eight clinically distinct autosomal dominant and two X-linked recessive forms. In addition, pedigree analyses suggest the occurrence of an autosomal recessive variant. The clinical classification is increasingly being replaced by a genetic one. To date gene loci have been identified in at least six autosomal dominant forms, i. e., in idiopathic torsion dystonia (9q34), focal dystonia (18p), adult-onset idiopathic torsion dystonia of mixed type (8p21-q22), dopa-responsive dystonia (14q22. 1-q22. 2), and paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis (2q25-q33; 1p21-p13. 3). Gene loci in the X-linked recessive  forms have been assigned to Xq13. 1 in the X-linked dystonia parkinsonism syndrome and to Xq22 in X-linked sensorineural deafness, dystonia, and mental retardation. The disease genes have been identified in two autosomal dominant forms and in one X-linked recessive form. Mutations in a gene coding for an ATP-binding protein were detected in idiopathic torsion dystonia (DYT1), and the GTP cyclohydrolase 1 gene is mutated in dopa-responsive dystonia (DYT5). In sensorineural deafness, dystonia, and mental retardation , mutations were found in the gene DDP coding for a polypeptide of unknown function. This article reviews the clinical and molecular genetics of primary dystonias, critically discusses present findings, and proposes referring to the known forms, most of which can be distinguished by genetic criteria, as dystonias 1-12.

primary dystonias
Primary dystonias
focal dystonia
primary dystonias
dystonias 1-12
Decrease in GTP cyclohydrolase I gene expression caused by inactivation of one allele in hereditary progressive dystonia with marked diurnal fluctuation.
Hereditary progressive dystonia with marked diurnal fluctuation (HPD; dopa-responsive dystonia, DRD) have been recently found to be caused by a genetic defect in the GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCH1) gene. In this study, we quantified the mRNA level of GCH1 in phytohemagglutinin (PHA) -stimulated mononuclear blood cells from one Japanese family that do not have a mutation in the coding region or splice junctions of the gene. The results showed that the amounts of the GCH1 mRNA were decreased to about 40% of the normal level in both patients and carriers. In addition, we found that the GCH1 mRNA was transcribed from only one allele, indicating that the other allele was in an inactive state. These results suggest that some novel mutations should exist on one of the alleles in some unknown region of the GCH1 gene, and may decrease the GCH1 mRNA causing the HPD/DRD symptoms.. 

hereditary progressive dystonia
Hereditary progressive dystonia
HPD
HPD