Coincident Kaposi sarcoma and T-cell lymphoma in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
A 24 year old male with a history of eczema, recurrent mild infections, and thrombocytopenia consistent with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) presented with a mediastinal mass, generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and severe thrombocytopenia. Studies of immune function including immunoglobulin levels and T-cell subsets were normal. Furthermore, his T lymphocytes proliferated normally in response to phytohemagglutinin, concanavalin A, and the combination of neuraminidase/galactose oxidase. However, their proliferative responses to anti-CD43 antibody and periodate were diminished, consistent with the clinical diagnosis of WAS. An initial inguinal lymph node biopsy surprisingly revealed Kaposi sarcoma. However, following splenectomy to increase the platelet count, biopsy of the mediastinal mass revealed T-cell large cell lymphoma. Studies of biopsied tissue for the presence of Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were negative, as were studies of blood, including the polymerase chain reaction, for the presence of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This is the first report of Kaposi sarcoma arising in a patient with a congenital immunodeficiency syndrome. Although Kaposi sarcoma can arise in the face of the severe immunosuppression that follows allograft transplantation and in patients infected with HIV, we postulate that longevity in the face of mild immunosuppression was the major factor in the development of Kaposi sarcoma in this patient.. 

Epstein-Barr virus
Spontaneous reversion of novel Lesch-Nyhan mutation by HPRT gene rearrangement.
Molecular analysis of an unusual patient with the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome has suggested that the mutation is due to a partial HPRT gene duplication. We now report the cloning and sequencing of the mutant HPRT cDNA which shows the precise duplication of exons 2 and 3. This mutation is the result of an internal duplication of 16-20 kilobases of the gene. The structure of the mutant gene suggests that the duplication was not generated by a single unequal crossing-over event between two normal HPRT alleles. Growth of Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblasts from this patient in selective medium has permitted isolation of spontaneous HPRT + revertants of this mutation. The reversion event involves a second major HPRT gene rearrangement where most or all of the duplicated portion of the mutant gene is deleted. The original mutation therefore has the potential for spontaneous somatic reversion. This may explain the relatively mild symptoms of the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome exhibited by this patient.. 

Epstein-Barr