Age of onset in Huntington disease : sex specific influence of apolipoprotein E genotype and normal CAG repeat length.
Age of onset (AO) of Huntington disease (HD) is known to be correlated with the length of an expanded CAG repeat in the HD gene. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, in turn, is known to influence AO in Alzheimer disease, rendering the APOE gene a likely candidate to affect AO in other neurological diseases too. We therefore determined APOE genotype and normal CAG repeat length in the HD gene for 138 HD patients who were previously analysed with respect to CAG repeat length. Genotyping for APOE was performed blind to clinical information. In addition to highlighting the effect of the normal repeat length upon AO in maternally inherited HD and in male patients, we show that the APOE epsilon2epsilon3 genotype is associated with significantly earlier AO in males than in females. Such a sex difference in AO was not apparent for any of the other APOE genotypes. Our findings suggest that subtle differences in the course of the neurodegeneration  in HD  may allow interacting genes to exert gender specific effects upon AO.

neurological diseases
Clinical and molecular genetic analysis of 19 Wolfram syndrome kindreds demonstrating a wide spectrum of mutations in WFS1.
Wolfram syndrome is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus and progressive optic atrophy. mtDNA deletions have been described, and a gene (WFS1) recently has been identified, on chromosome 4p16, encoding a predicted 890 amino acid transmembrane protein. Direct DNA sequencing was done to screen the entire coding region of the WFS1 gene in 30 patients from 19 British kindreds with Wolfram syndrome. DNA was also screened for structural rearrangements (deletions and duplications) and point mutations in mtDNA. No pathogenic mtDNA mutations were found in our cohort. We identified 24 mutations in the WFS1 gene  8 nonsense mutations, 8 missense mutations, 3 in-frame deletions, 1 in-frame insertion, and 4 frameshift mutations. Of these, 23 were novel mutations, and most occurred in exon 8. The majority of patients were compound heterozygotes for two mutations, and there was no common founder mutation. The data were also analyzed for genotype-phenotype relationships. Although some interesting cases were noted, consideration of the small sample size and frequency of each mutation indicated no clear-cut correlations between any of the observed mutations and disease severity. There were no obvious mutation hot spots or clusters. Hence, molecular screening for Wolfram syndrome in affected families and for Wolfram syndrome-carrier status in subjects with psychiatric disorders or diabetes mellitus will require complete analysis of exon 8 and upstream exons.. 

autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder
Friedreich ataxia: an overview.
Friedreich ataxia, an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease, is the most common of the inherited ataxias. The recent discovery of the gene that is mutated in this condition, FRDA, has led to rapid advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis of Friedreich ataxia. About 98% of mutant alleles have an expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat in intron 1 of the gene. This leads to reduced levels of the protein, frataxin. There is mounting evidence to suggest that Friedreich ataxia is the result of accumulation of iron in mitochondria leading to excess production of free radicals, which then results in cellular damage and death. Currently there is no known treatment that alters the natural course of the disease. The discovery of the FRDA gene and its possible function has raised hope that rational therapeutic strategies will be developed.. 

autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease
The human MAGEL2 gene and its mouse homologue are paternally expressed and mapped to the Prader-Willi region.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex neurogenetic disorder. The phenotype is likely to be a contiguous gene syndrome involving genes which are paternally expressed only, located in the human 15q11-q13 region. Four mouse models of PWS have been reported but these do not definitively allow the delineation of the critical region and the associated genes involved in the aetiology of PWS. Moreover, targeted mutagenesis of mouse homologues of the human candidate PWS genes does not appear to result in any of the features of PWS. Therefore, the isolation of new genes in this region remains crucial for a better understanding of the molecular basis of PWS. In this manuscript, we report the characterization of MAGEL2 and its mouse homologue Magel2. These are located in the human 15q11-q13 and mouse 7C regions, in close proximity to NDN/Ndn. By northern blot analysis we did not detect any expression of MAGEL2/Magel2 but by RT-PCR analysis, specific expression was detected in fetal and adult brain and in placenta. Both genes are intronless with tandem direct repeat sequences contained within a CpG island in the 5-untranscribed region. The transcripts encode putative proteins that are homologous to the MAGE proteins and NDN. Moreover, MAGEL2/Magel2 are expressed only from the paternal allele in brain, suggesting a potential role in the aetiology of PWS and its mouse model, respectively.. 

neurogenetic disorder
De novo deletions of SNRPN exon 1 in early human and mouse embryos result in a paternal to maternal imprint switch.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurogenetic disease characterized by infantile hypotonia, gonadal hypoplasia, obsessive behaviour and neonatal feeding difficulties followed by hyperphagia, leading to profound obesity. PWS is due to a lack of paternal genetic information at 15q11-q13 (ref. 2). Five imprinted, paternally expressed genes map to the PWS region, MKRN3 (ref. 3), NDN (ref. 4), NDNL1 (ref. 5), SNRPN (refs 6-8) and IPW (ref. 9), as well as two poorly characterized framents designated PAR-1 and PAR-5 (ref. 10). Imprinting of this region involves a bipartite imprinting centre (IC), which overlaps SNRPN (refs 10, 11). Deletion of the SNRPN promoter/exon 1 region (the PWS IC element) appears to impair the establishment of the paternal imprint in the male germ line and leads to PWS. Here we report a PWS family in which the father is mosaic for an IC deletion on his paternal chromosome. The deletion chromosome has acquired a maternal methylation imprint in his somatic cells. We have made identical findings in chimaeric mice generated from two independent embryonic stem (ES) cell lines harbouring a similar deletion. Our studies demonstrate that the PWS IC element is not only required for the establishment of the paternal imprint, but also for its postzygotic maintenance.. 

neurogenetic disease