Overexpression of DM20 messenger RNA in two brothers with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is a rare, sex-linked recessive, dysmyelinating disease of the central nervous system that has been associated with mutations in the myelin proteolipid protein (PLP) gene. Only 25% of patients studied with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease have exonic mutations in this gene, the underlying cause of the disease in the remaining patients is unknown. The PLP gene encodes two major alternatively spliced transcripts called PLP and DM20. PLP messenger RNA is specifically expressed in central nervous system tissue, whereas DM20 messenger RNA is found in central nervous system, cardiac, and other tissues. We studied cultured skin fibroblasts from 2 brothers with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease who exhibited no detectable exonic mutation of the PLP gene. Examination of RNA from these cells showed that the level of DM20 messenger RNA is elevated sixfold relative to male control skin fibroblasts. An unrelated female carrier, also with no detectable exonic mutation, showed a threefold increase in DM20 messenger RNA in cultured skin fibroblasts. Our findings suggest that in some patients, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is caused by overexpression of PLP gene transcripts, and that in these families a 50% increase of DM20 messenger RNA in females, relative to the increase in affected males, can identify a female carrier.. 

rare, sex-linked recessive, dysmyelinating disease of the central nervous system
Proteolipoprotein gene analysis in 82 patients with sporadic Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease: duplications, the major cause of the disease, originate more frequently in male germ cells, but point mutations do not. The Clinical European Network on Brain Dysmyelinating Disease.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease (PMD) is an X-linked developmental defect of myelination affecting the central nervous system and segregating with the proteolipoprotein (PLP) locus. Investigating 82 strictly selected sporadic cases of PMD, we found PLP mutations in 77%; complete PLP-gene duplications were the most frequent abnormality (62%), whereas point mutations in coding or splice-site regions of the gene were involved less frequently (38%). We analyzed the maternal status of 56 cases to determine the origin of both types of PLP mutation, since this is relevant to genetic counseling. In the 22 point mutations, 68% of mothers were heterozygous for the mutation, a value identical to the two-thirds of carrier mothers that would be expected if there were an equal mutation rate in male and female germ cells. In sharp contrast, among the 34 duplicated cases, 91% of mothers were carriers, a value significantly (chi2 = 9. 20, P <. 01) in favor of a male bias, with an estimation of the male/female mutation frequency (k) of 9. 3 3. Moreover, we observed the occurrence of de novo mutations between parental and grandparental generations in 17 three-generation families, which allowed a direct estimation of the k value (k = 11). Again, a significant male mutation imbalance was observed only for the duplications. 

Brain Dysmyelinating Disease
X-linked developmental defect of myelination
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: an X-linked neurologic disorder of myelin metabolism with a novel mutation in the gene encoding proteolipid protein.
The nosology of the inborn errors of myelin metabolism has been stymied by the lack of molecular genetic analysis. Historically, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease has encompassed a host of neurologic disorders that present with a deficit of myelin, the membrane elaborated by glial cells that encircles and successively enwraps axons. We describe here a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher pedigree of the classical type, with X-linked inheritance, a typical clinical progression, and a pathologic loss of myelinating cells and myelin in the central nervous system. To discriminate variants of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a set of oligonucleotide primers was constructed to polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) amplify and sequence the gene encoding proteolipid protein (PLP), a structural protein that comprises half of the protein of the myelin sheath. The PLP gene in one of two affected males and the carrier mother of this family exhibited a single base difference in the more than 2 kb of the PLP gene sequenced, a C----T transition that would create a serine substitution for proline at the carboxy end of the protein. Our results delineate the clinical features of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, define the possible molecular pathology of this dysmyelinating disorder, and address the molecular classification of inborn errors of myelin metabolism. Patients with the classical form (type I) and the more severely affected, connatal variant of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (type II) would be predicted to display mutation at the PLP locus. The other variants (types III-VI), which have sometimes been categorized as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, may represent mutations in genes encoding other structural myelin proteins or proteins critical to myelination.. 

X-linked neurologic disorder of myelin metabolism
inborn errors of myelin metabolism
inborn errors of myelin metabolism
X-linked spastic paraplegia and Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease are allelic disorders at the proteolipid protein locus.
Three forms of X-linked spastic paraplegia (SPG) have been defined. One locus (SPG 1) maps to Xq28 while two clinically distinct forms map to Xq22 (SPG2). A rare X-linked dysmyelinating disorder of the central nervous system, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD), has also been mapped to Xq21-q22, and is caused by mutations in the proteolipid protein gene (PLP) which encodes two myelin proteins, PLP and DM20. While narrowing the genetic interval containing SPG2 in a large pedigree, we found that PLP was the closest marker to the disease locus, implicating PLP as a possible candidate gene. We have found that a point mutation (His139Tyr) in exon 3B of an affected male produces a mutant PLP but a normal DM20, and segregates with the disease (Zmax = 6. 63, theta = 0. 00). It appears, therefore, that SPG2 and PMD are allelic disorders 

X-linked dysmyelinating disorder