beta-galactosidase gene mutations affecting the lysosomal enzyme and the elastin-binding protein in GM1-gangliosidosis patients with cardiac involvement.
GM1-gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficiency of acid beta-galactosidase (GLB1). We report five new beta-galactosidase gene mutations in nine Italian patients and one fetus, segregating in seven unrelated families. Six of the eight patients with the infantile, severe form of the disease presented cardiac involvement, a feature rarely associated with GM1-gangliosidosis. Molecular analysis of the patients RNA and DNA identified two new RNA splicing defects, three new and three previously described amino acid substitutions. Interestingly, all patients with cardiac involvement were homozygous for one of these mutations  R59H, Y591C, Y591N, or IVS14-2A > G. In contrast, all other patients were compound heterozygous for one of the following mutations  R201H, R482H, G579D, IVS8 + 2T > C. Although we could not directly correlate the presence of cardiac abnormalities with specific genetic lesions, the mutations identified in patients with cardiomyopathy fell in the GLB1 cDNA region common to the lysosomal enzyme and the Hbeta-Gal-related protein, also known as the elastin binding protein (EBP). Consequently, both molecules are affected by the mutations, and they may contribute differently to the occurrence of specific clinical manifestations.. 

genetic lesions
Molecular evidence for new mutation at the hprt locus in Lesch-Nyhan patients.
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT; EC2. 4. 2. 8), which functions in the metabolic salvage of purines, is encoded by an X-linked gene in man. Partial HPRT deficiencies are associated with gouty arthritis, while absence of activity results in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (L-N). L-N patients fail to reproduce and the heterozygous state appears to confer no selective advantage. Thus, Haldanes principle predicts that new mutations at the hprt locus must occur frequently in order for L-N syndrome to be maintained in the population. This constant introduction of new mutations would be expected to result in a heterogeneous collection of genetic lesions, some of which may be novel. As we report here, the mutations in the hprt gene of seven L-N patients, selected from an initial survey of 28 patients, have been characterized and all were found to be distinctly different, as predicted. The origin of one unusual mutation has been identified by analysis of DNA from four generations of family members. Further molecular analysis of the origin of new mutations at the hprt locus should aid in resolving the issue of an apparent difference in the frequency of hprt mutations in males and females 

genetic lesions