Genomic organization of the adrenoleukodystrophy gene.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), the most frequent peroxisomal disorder, is a severe neurodegenerative disease associated with an impairment of very long chain fatty acids beta-oxidation. We have recently identified by positional cloning the gene responsible for ALD, located in Xq28. It encodes a new member of the " ABC " superfamily of membrane-associated transporters that shows, in particular, significant homology to the 70-kDa peroxisomal membrane protein (PMP70). We report here a detailed characterization of the ALD gene structure. It extends over 21 kb and consists of 10 exons. To facilitate the detection of mutations in ALD patients, we have determined the intronic sequences flanking the exons as well as the sequence of the 3 untranslated region and of the immediate 5 promoter region. Sequences present in distal exons cross-hybridize strongly to additional sequences in the human genome. The ALD gene has been positioned on a pulsed-field map between DXS15 and the L1CAM gene, about 650 kb upstream from the color pigment genes. The frequent occurrence of color vision anomalies observed in patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy (the adult onset form of ALD) thus does not represent a contiguous gene syndrome but a secondary manifestation of ALD.. 

contiguous gene syndrome
Color vision defects in adrenomyeloneuropathy.
The relationship between abnormal color vision and adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) was investigated in 27 AMN patients and 31 age-matched controls by using the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 Hue test. Twelve (44%) of 27 patients showed test scores significantly above normal. The axes of bipolarity determined by the testing differed widely between the patients with abnormal scores, compatible with the notion that different alterations in visual pigment genes occur in different AMN kindreds. These observations confirm our earlier impression that the frequency of abnormal color vision is increased in these kindreds, and it supports our contentions that (1) AMN (and its companion, adrenoleukodystrophy) are very closely linked to the visual pigment loci at Xq28 and (2) this proximity might provide the opportunity to observe contiguous gene defects.. 

contiguous gene defects
The human MAGEL2 gene and its mouse homologue are paternally expressed and mapped to the Prader-Willi region.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex neurogenetic disorder. The phenotype is likely to be a contiguous gene syndrome involving genes which are paternally expressed only, located in the human 15q11-q13 region. Four mouse models of PWS have been reported but these do not definitively allow the delineation of the critical region and the associated genes involved in the aetiology of PWS. Moreover, targeted mutagenesis of mouse homologues of the human candidate PWS genes does not appear to result in any of the features of PWS. Therefore, the isolation of new genes in this region remains crucial for a better understanding of the molecular basis of PWS. In this manuscript, we report the characterization of MAGEL2 and its mouse homologue Magel2. These are located in the human 15q11-q13 and mouse 7C regions, in close proximity to NDN/Ndn. By northern blot analysis we did not detect any expression of MAGEL2/Magel2 but by RT-PCR analysis, specific expression was detected in fetal and adult brain and in placenta. Both genes are intronless with tandem direct repeat sequences contained within a CpG island in the 5-untranscribed region. The transcripts encode putative proteins that are homologous to the MAGE proteins and NDN. Moreover, MAGEL2/Magel2 are expressed only from the paternal allele in brain, suggesting a potential role in the aetiology of PWS and its mouse model, respectively.. 

contiguous gene syndrome