Mutations in TNFRSF11A, affecting the signal peptide of RANK, cause familial expansile osteolysis.
Familial expansile osteolysis (FEO, MIM 174810) is a rare, autosomal dominant bone disorder characterized by focal areas of increased bone remodelling. The osteolytic lesions, which develop usually in the long bones during early adulthood, show increased osteoblast and osteoclast activity. Our previous linkage studies mapped the gene responsible for FEO to an interval of less than 5 cM between D18S64 and D18S51 on chromosome 18q21. 2-21 2-21. 3 in a large Northern Irish family. The gene encoding receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B (RANK; ref. 5), TNFRSF11A, maps to this region. RANK is essential in osteoclast formation. We identified two heterozygous insertion mutations in exon 1 of TNFRSF11A in affected members of four families with FEO or familial Paget disease of bone (PDB). One was a duplication of 18 bases and the other a duplication of 27 bases, both of which affected the signal peptide region of the RANK molecule. Expression of recombinant forms of the mutant RANK proteins revealed perturbations in expression levels and lack of normal cleavage of the signal peptide. Both mutations caused an increase in RANK-mediated nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) signalling in vitro, consistent with the presence of an activating mutation.

osteolytic lesions
Haim-Munk syndrome and Papillon-Lefevre syndrome are allelic mutations in cathepsin C.
Of the many palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) conditions, only Papillon-Lefevre syndrome (PLS) and Haim-Munk syndrome (HMS) are associated with premature periodontal destruction. Although both PLS and HMS share the cardinal features of PPK and severe periodontitis, a number of additional findings are reported in HMS including arachnodactyly, acro-osteolysis, atrophic changes of the nails, and a radiographic deformity of the fingers. While PLS cases have been identified throughout the world, HMS has only been described among descendants of a religious isolate originally from Cochin, India. Parental consanguinity is a characteristic of many cases of both conditions. Although autosomal recessive transmission of PLS is evident, a more " complex " autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance with phenotypic influences from a closely linked modifying locus has been hypothesised for HMS. Recently, mutations of the cathepsin C gene have been identified as the underlying genetic defect in PLS. To determine if a cathepsin C mutation is also responsible for HMS, we sequenced the gene in affected and unaffected subjects from the Cochin isolate in which both the PLS and HMS phenotypes appear. Here we report identification of a mutation of cathepsin C (exon 6, 2127A-- > G) that changes a highly conserved amino acid in the cathepsin C peptide. This mutation segregates with HMS in four nuclear families. Additionally, the existence of a shared common haplotype for genetic loci flanking the cathepsin C gene suggests that affected subjects descended from the Cochin isolate are homozygous for a mutation inherited " identical by descent " from a common ancestor. This finding supports simple autosomal recessive inheritance for HMS in these families. We also report a mutation of the same exon 6 CTSC codon (2126C-- > T) in a Turkish family with classical PLS. These findings provide evidence that PLS and HMS are allelic variants of cathepsin C gene mutations.. 

acro-osteolysis