Overexpression of DM20 messenger RNA in two brothers with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is a rare, sex-linked recessive, dysmyelinating disease of the central nervous system that has been associated with mutations in the myelin proteolipid protein (PLP) gene. Only 25% of patients studied with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease have exonic mutations in this gene, the underlying cause of the disease in the remaining patients is unknown. The PLP gene encodes two major alternatively spliced transcripts called PLP and DM20. PLP messenger RNA is specifically expressed in central nervous system tissue, whereas DM20 messenger RNA is found in central nervous system, cardiac, and other tissues. We studied cultured skin fibroblasts from 2 brothers with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease who exhibited no detectable exonic mutation of the PLP gene. Examination of RNA from these cells showed that the level of DM20 messenger RNA is elevated sixfold relative to male control skin fibroblasts. An unrelated female carrier, also with no detectable exonic mutation, showed a threefold increase in DM20 messenger RNA in cultured skin fibroblasts. Our findings suggest that in some patients, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is caused by overexpression of PLP gene transcripts, and that in these families a 50% increase of DM20 messenger RNA in females, relative to the increase in affected males, can identify a female carrier.. 

rare, sex-linked recessive, dysmyelinating disease of the central nervous system
ATM phosphorylates p95/nbs1 in an S-phase checkpoint pathway.
The rare diseases ataxia-telangiectasia (AT), caused by mutations in the ATM gene, and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), with mutations in the p95/nbs1 gene, share a variety of phenotypic abnormalities such as chromosomal instability, radiation sensitivity and defects in cell-cycle checkpoints in response to ionizing radiation. The ATM gene encodes a protein kinase that is activated by ionizing radiation or radiomimetic drugs, whereas p95/nbs1 is part of a protein complex that is involved in responses to DNA double-strand breaks. Here, because of the similarities between AT and NBS, we evaluated the functional interactions between ATM and p95/nbs1. Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and induction of ATM-dependent responses in NBS cells indicated that p95/nbs1 may not be required for signalling to ATM after ionizing radiation. However, p95/nbs1 was phosphorylated on serine 343 in an ATM-dependent manner in vitro and in vivo after ionizing radiation. A p95/nbs1 construct mutated at the ATM phosphorylation site abrogated an S-phase checkpoint induced by ionizing radiation in normal cells and failed to compensate for this functional deficiency in NBS cells. These observations link ATM and p95/nbs1 in a common signalling pathway and provide an explanation for phenotypic similarities in these two diseases.. 

rare diseases