Norrie disease gene: characterization of deletions and possible function.
Positional cloning experiments have resulted recently in the isolation of a candidate gene for Norrie disease (pseudoglioma; NDP), a severe X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder. Here we report the isolation and analysis of human genomic DNA clones encompassing the NDP gene. The gene spans 28 kb and consists of 3 exons, the first of which is entirely contained within the 5 untranslated region. Detailed analysis of genomic deletions in Norrie patients shows that they are heterogeneous, both in size and in position. By PCR analysis, we found that expression of the NDP gene was not confined to the eye or to the brain. An extensive DNA and protein sequence comparison between the human NDP gene and related genes from the database revealed homology with cysteine-rich protein-binding domains of immediate--early genes implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation. We propose that NDP is a molecule related in function to these genes and may be involved in a pathway that regulates neural cell differentiation and proliferation.. 

X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder
Understanding the molecular basis of fragile X syndrome.
Fragile X syndrome, a common form of inherited mental retardation, is mainly caused by massive expansion of CGG triplet repeats located in the 5-untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation-1 (FMR1) gene. In patients with fragile X syndrome, the expanded CGG triplet repeats are hypermethylated and the expression of the FMR1 gene is repressed, which leads to the absence of FMR1 protein (FMRP) and subsequent mental retardation. FMRP is an RNA-binding protein that shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm. This protein has been implicated in protein translation as it is found associated with polyribosomes and the rough endoplasmic reticulum. We discuss here the recent progress made towards understanding the molecular mechanism of CGG repeat expansion and physiological function (s) of FMRP. These studies will not only help to illuminate the molecular basis of the general class of human diseases with trinucleotide repeat expansion but also provide an avenue to understand aspects of human cognition and intelligence.. 

inherited mental retardation
Fibroblast growth factor homologous factor 2 (FHF2): gene structure, expression and mapping to the Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome region in Xq26 delineated by a duplication breakpoint in a BFLS-like patient.
Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (BFLS) is a syndromal X-linked mental retardation, which maps by linkage to the q26 region of the human X chromosome. We have identified a male patient with BFLS-like features and a duplication, 46, Y, dup (X) (q26q28), inherited from his phenotypically normal mother. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation using yeast artificial chromosome clones from Xq26 localised the duplication breakpoint to an approximately 400-kb interval in the Xq26. 3 region between DXS155 and DXS294/DXS730. Database searches and analysis of available genomic DNA sequence from the region revealed the presence of the fibroblast growth factor homologous factor gene, FHF2, within the duplication breakpoint interval. The gene structure of FHF2 was determined and two new exons were identified, including a new 5 end exon, 1B. FHF2 is a large gene extending over approximately 200 kb in Xq26. 3 and is composed of at least seven exons. It shows tissue-specific alternative splicing and alternative transcription starts. Northern blot hybridisation showed highest expression in brain and skeletal muscle. The FHF2 gene localisation and tissue-specific expression pattern suggest it to be a candidate gene for familial cases of the BFLS syndrome and other syndromal and non-specific forms of X-linked mental retardation mapping to the region.

X-linked mental retardation
X-linked mental retardation