Characterization of a germline mosaicism in families with Lowe syndrome, and identification of seven novel mutations in the OCRL1 gene.
The oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL) is an X-linked disorder characterized by major abnormalities of eyes, nervous system, and kidneys. Mutations in the OCRL1 gene have been associated with the disease. OCRL1 encodes a phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-biphosphate (PtdIns [4, 5] P2) 5-phosphatase. We have examined the OCRL1 gene in eight unrelated patients with OCRL and have found seven new mutations and one recurrent in-frame deletion. Among the new mutations, two nonsense mutations (R317X and E558X) and three other frameshift mutations caused premature termination of the protein. A missense mutation, R483G, was located in the highly conserved PtdIns (4, 5) P2 5-phosphatase domain. Finally, one frameshift mutation, 2799delC, modifies the C-terminal part of OCRL1, with an extension of six amino acids. Altogether, 70% of missense mutations are located in exon 15, and 52% of all mutations cluster in exons 11-15. We also identified two new microsatellite markers for the OCRL1 locus, and we detected a germline mosaicism in one family. This observation has direct implications for genetic counseling of Lowe syndrome families.. 

X-linked disorder
Changes at P183 of emerin weaken its protein-protein interactions resulting in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy characterized by early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and spine, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and cardiomyopathy associated with cardiac conduction defects. The emerin gene has been mapped to Xq28 and encodes a 34-kDa serine-rich protein, emerin, which has been localized to the nuclear envelope in a wide variety of tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mutations spanning the emerin gene have been identified in patients with EDMD. We present here the effect, on emerin protein expression, of two missense mutations identified in unrelated EDMD patients. These alterations predict the replacement of a proline residue at position 183 with either a histidine or a threonine. Biochemical analysis has demonstrated that the mobility and expression levels of the mutant forms of emerin are indistinguishable from that of wild-type emerin, but that they have weakened interactions with nuclear lamina components. In comparison with the usual EDMD phenotype, patients with P183 missense mutations have a later age at onset of first symptoms, elbow contractures, ankle contractures, upper limb weakness and lower limb weakness, but there is no difference for the age at onset of cardiac involvement. This is the first report of protein studies on patients with missense mutations resulting in the clinical features of EDMD. These studies demonstrate the importance of proline 183 for the proper structure/function of emerin.. 

X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy
Putative X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy gene shares unexpected homology with ABC transporters.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked disease affecting 1/20, 000 males either as cerebral ALD in childhood or as adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) in adults. Childhood ALD is the more severe form, with onset of neurological symptoms between 5-12 years of age. Central nervous system demyelination progresses rapidly and death occurs within a few years. AMN is a milder form of the disease with onset at 15-30 years of age and a more progressive course. Adrenal insufficiency (Addisons disease) may remain the only clinical manifestation of ALD. The principal biochemical abnormality of ALD is the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) because of impaired beta-oxidation in peroxisomes. The normal oxidation of VLCFA-CoA in patients fibroblasts suggested that the gene coding for the VLCFA-CoA synthetase could be a candidate gene for ALD. Here we use positional cloning to identify a gene partially deleted in 6 of 85 independent patients with ALD. In familial cases, the deletions segregated with the disease. An identical deletion was detected in two brothers presenting with different clinical ALD phenotypes. Candidate exons were identified by computer analysis of genomic sequences and used to isolate complementary DNAs by exon connection and screening of cDNA libraries. The deduced protein sequence shows significant sequence identity to a peroxisomal membrane protein of M (r) 70K that is involved in peroxisome biogenesis and belongs to the ATP-binding cassette superfamily of transporters.. 

X-linked disease
Novel mutations in XLRS1 causing retinoschisis, including first evidence of putative leader sequence change.
Juvenile retinoschisis is an X-linked recessive disease caused by mutations in the XLRS1 gene. We screened 31 new unrelated patients and families for XLRS1 mutations in addition to previously reported mutations for 60 of our families (Retinoschisis Consortium, Hum Mol Genet 1998; 7  1185-1192). Twenty-three different mutations including 12 novel ones were identified in 28 patients. Mutations identified in this study include 19 missense mutations, two nonsense mutations, one intragenic deletion, four microdeletions, one insertion, and one intronic sequence substitution that is likely to result in a splice site defect. Two novel mutations, c. 38T-- > C (L13P) and c. 667T-- > C (C223R), respectively, present the first genetic evidence for the functional significance of the putative leader peptide sequence and for the functional significance at the carboxyl terminal of the XLRS1 protein beyond the discoidin domain. Mutations in 25 of the families were localized to exons 4-6, emphasizing the critical functional significance of the discoidin domain of the XLRS1 protein 

X-linked recessive disease
Natural selection of hemi- and heterozygotes for G6PD deficiency in Africa by resistance to severe malaria.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, the most common enzymopathy of humans, affects over 400 million people. The geographical correlation of its distribution with the historical endemicity of malaria suggests that this disorder has risen in frequency through natural selection by malaria. However, attempts to confirm that G6PD deficiency is protective in case-control studies of malaria have yielded conflicting results. Hence, for this X-linked disorder, it is unclear whether both male hemizygotes and female heterozygotes are protected or, as frequently suggested, only females. Furthermore, how much protection may be afforded is unknown. Here we report that, in two large case-control studies of over 2, 000 African children, the common African form of G6PD deficiency (G6PD A-) is associated with a 46-58% reduction in risk of severe malaria for both female heterozygotes and male hemizygotes. A mathematical model incorporating the measured selective advantage against malaria suggests that a counterbalancing selective disadvantage, associated with this enzyme deficiency, has retarded its rise in frequency in malaria-endemic regions. Although G6PD deficiency is now regarded as a generally benign disorder, in earlier environmental conditions it could have been significantly disadvantageous.. 

X-linked disorder
A mutation in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of the FGD1 gene in an Italian family with faciogenital dysplasia (Aarskog-Scott syndrome).
Aarskog-Scott Syndrome (AAS) is an X-linked disorder characterised by short stature and multiple facial, limb and genital abnormalities. A gene, FGD1, altered in a patient with AAS phenotype, has been identified and found to encode a protein with homology to Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors (Rho/Rac GEF). However, since this original report on identification of a mutated FGD1 gene in an AAS patient, no additional mutations in the FGD1 gene have been described. We analysed 13 independent patients with clinical diagnosis of AAS. One patient presented a mutation that results in a nucleotide change in exon 10 of the FGD1 gene (G2559 > A) substituting a Gln for Arg in position 610. The mutation was found to segregate with the AAS phenotype in affected males and carrier females in the family of this patient. Interestingly, Arg-610 is located within one of the two pleckstrin homology (PH) domains of the FGD1 gene and it corresponds to a highly conserved residue which has been involved in InsP binding in PH domains of other proteins. The same residue is often mutated in the Brutons tyrosine kinase (Btk) gene in patients with an X-linked agammaglobulinemia. The Arg610Gln mutation represents the first case of a mutation in the PH domain of the FGD1 gene and additional evidence that mutations in PH domains can be associated to human diseases.. 

X-linked disorder
The Norrie disease gene maps to a 150 kb region on chromosome Xp11.3.
Norrie disease is a human X-linked recessive disorder of unknown etiology characterized by congenital blindness, sensory neural deafness and mental retardation. This disease gene was previously linked to the DXS7 (L1. 28) locus and the MAO genes in band Xp11. 3 3. We report here fine physical mapping of the obligate region containing the Norrie disease gene (NDP) defined by a recombination and by the smallest submicroscopic chromosomal deletion associated with Norrie disease identified to date. Analysis, using in addition two overlapping YAC clones from this region, allowed orientation of the MAOA and MAOB genes in a 5-3-3-5 configuration. A recombination event between a (GT) n polymorphism in intron 2 of the MAOB gene and the NDP locus, in a family previously reported to have a recombination between DXS7 and NDP, delineates a flanking marker telomeric to this disease gene. An anonymous DNA probe, dc12, present in one of the YACs and in a patient with a submicroscopic deletion which includes MAOA and MAOB but not L1. 28, serves as a flanking marker centromeric to the disease gene. An Alu-PCR fragment from the right arm of the MAO YAC (YMAO. AluR) is not deleted in this patient and also delineates the centromeric extent of the obligate disease region. The apparent order of these loci is telomere. DXS7-MAOA-MAOB-NDP-dc12-YMAO DXS7-MAOA-MAOB-NDP-dc12-YMAO. AluR. centromere. Together these data define the obligate region containing the NDP gene to a chromosomal segment less than 150 kb.

X-linked recessive disorder
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency: analysis of HPRT mutations by direct sequencing and allele-specific amplification.
The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a severe X chromosome-linked human disease caused by a virtual absence of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) activity. A partial deficiency in the activity of this enzyme can result in gouty arthritis. To determine the genetic basis for reduction or loss of enzyme activity, we have amplified and sequenced the coding region of HPRT cDNA from four patients  one with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (HPRTPerth) and three with partial deficiencies of HPRT activity, which have been designated HPRTUrangan, HPRTSwan and HPRTToowong. In all four patients, the only mutation identified was a single base substitution in exons 2 or 3 of the coding region, which in each case predicts a single amino acid substitution in the translated protein. Each base change was confirmed by allele-specific amplification of the patients genomic DNA. It is interesting to note that the mutation found for HPRTPerth is identical to that reported for HPRTFlint. It appears that the two mutations are de novo events.. 

X chromosome-linked human disease
Choroideremia: close linkage to DXYS1 and DXYS12 demonstrated by segregation analysis and historical-genealogical evidence.
Linkage studies using restriction fragment length polymorphisms were conducted in the X-linked disorder, choroideremia, designated TCD for Progressive Tapeto-Choroidal Dystrophy. Previously demonstrated close linkage with locus DXYS1 was confirmed (lod 11. 44 at 0 recombination distance). In addition, locus DXYS12 was found to be closely linked with TCD (lod 3. 31 at 0 recombination distance). The disease mainly occurs in three large kindreds in remote Northern Finland. While formal genealogical proof is lacking, all presently living (more than 80 affected males and 120 carrier females) probably originate from a common founder couple born in 1644 and 1646, twelve generations ago. All 36 patients and 48 carriers tested from the three kindreds had the same haplotype (TCD/DXYS1, 11kb/DXYS12, 1. 6kb). Given that at least 105 female meioses transmitting TCD have occurred since 1650 in these kindreds, extremely close linkage between TCD, DXYS1 and DXYS12 is suggested. The above haplotype is a very useful diagnostic tool in these TCD families. We suggest that our historical-genealogical approach to linkage analysis may be possible elsewhere in similar isolated populations 

X-linked disorder
Craniofrontonasal dysplasia.
We report on nine patients with craniofrontonasal dysplasia (CFND). Seven classical cases had facial features suggestive of frontonasal dysplasia and coronal craniosynostosis. Extracranial abnormalities such as brittle nails with prominent longitudinal grooves or syndactyly of fingers and toes were observed in individual patients. In two families the father of classical cases showed a milder pattern of abnormalities, consistent with the diagnosis. We present a 2- to 13-year follow-up on our patients. Hypotonia and laxity of joints are common and may necessitate supportive measures. Mild developmental delay was noted in three out of six classical cases studied in detail. Unlike almost all other X-linked disorders, clinical expression in CFND is generally much more severe in females than in males. In contrast to previous reports of this condition, one of our severely affected cases is a male.. 

X-linked disorders
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked congenital thrombocytopenia are caused by mutations of the same gene.
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-linked recessive disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia, small platelets, eczema, recurrent infections, and immunodeficiency. Besides the classic WAS phenotype, there is a group of patients with congenital X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) who have small platelets but only transient eczema, if any, and minimal immune deficiency. Because the gene responsible for WAS has been sequenced, it was possible to correlate the WAS phenotypes with WAS gene mutations. Using a fingerprinting screening technique, we determined the approximate location of the mutation in 13 unrelated WAS patients with mild to severe clinical symptoms. Direct sequence analysis of cDNA and genomic DNA obtained from patient-derived cell lines showed 12 unique mutations distributed throughout the WAS gene, including insertions, deletions, and point mutations resulting in amino acid substitutions, termination, exon skipping, or splicing defects. Of 4 unrelated patients with the XLT phenotype, 3 had missense mutations affecting exon 2 and 1 had a splice-site mutation affecting exon 9. Patients with classic WAS had more complex mutations, resulting in termination codons, frameshift, and early termination. These findings provide direct evidence that XLT and WAS are caused by mutations of the same gene and suggest that severe clinical phenotypes are associated with complex mutations.. 

X-linked recessive disorder
Analysis of deletions in DNA from patients with Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive genetic disorder for which the biochemical defect is as yet unknown. Recently, two cloned segments of human X-chromosome DNA have been described which detect structural alterations within or near the genetic locus responsible for the disorder. Both of these cloned segments were described as tightly linked to the locus and were capable of detecting deletions in the DNA of boys affected with DMD. In an attempt to determine more precisely the occurrence of these deletions within a large population of DMD patients and the accuracy of one of the segments, DXS164 (pERT87), in determining the inheritance of the DMD X chromosome, the subclones 1, 8 and 15 were made available to many investigators throughout the world. Here we describe the combined results of more than 20 research laboratories with respect to the occurrence of deletions at the DXS164 locus in DNA samples isolated from patients with DMD and Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). The results indicate that the DXS164 locus apparently recombines with DMD 5% of the time, but is probably located between independent sites of mutation which yield DMD. The breakpoints of some deletions are delineated within the DXS164 locus, and it is evident that the deletions at the DMD locus are frequent and extremely large.. 

X-linked recessive genetic disorder
Additional case of female monozygotic twins discordant for the clinical manifestations of Duchenne muscular dystrophy due to opposite X-chromosome inactivation.
A pair of female monozygotic (MZ) twins, heterozygous carriers for a deletion in the DMD gene and discordant for the clinical manifestations of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, were analyzed by molecular studies, in situ hybridization, and methylation pattern of X chromosomes to search for opposite X inactivation as an explanation of their clinical discordance. Results in lymphocytes and skin fibroblast cell lines suggest a partial mirror inactivation with the normal X chromosome preferentially active in the unaffected twin, and the maternal deleted X chromosome preferentially active in the affected twin. A review shows that MZ female twins discordant for X-linked diseases are not uncommon. Twinning and X inactivation may be interrelated and could explain the female twins discordant for X-linked traits.. 

X-linked diseases
Isolation of the gene for McLeod syndrome that encodes a novel membrane transport protein.
McLeod syndrome is an X-linked multisystem disorder characterized by abnormalities in the neuromuscular and hematopoietic systems. We have assembled a cosmid contig of 360 kb that encompasses the McLeod gene locus. A 50 kb deletion was detected by screening DNA from patients with radiolabeled whole cosmids, and two transcription units were identified within this deletion. The mRNA expression pattern of one of them, designated as XK, correlates closely to the McLeod phenotype. XK encodes a novel protein with structural characteristics of prokaryotic and eukaryotic membrane transport proteins. Nucleotide sequence analysis of XK from two unrelated McLeod patients has identified point mutations at conserved splice donor and acceptor sites. These findings provide direct evidence that XK is responsible for McLeod syndrome.. 

X-linked multisystem disorder