Somatic rearrangement of chromosome 14 in human lymphocytes.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare genetic disorder associated with immune deficiency, chromosome instability, and a predisposition to lymphoid malignancy. We have detected chromosomally anomalous clones of lymphocytes in eight patients with this disorder. Chromosome banding disclosed that the clones are consistently marked by structural rearrangement of the long arm (q) of chromosome 14. A translocation involving 14q was found in clones obtained from seven of the eight patients whereas a ring 14 chromosome was found in a clone obtained from the other. These findings as well as data obtained by others for patients with ataxia-telangiectasia suggest that structural rearrangement of 14q is the initial chromosomal change in lymphocyte clones of patients with this disorder. Chromosomes of lymphocytes from one of the patients were studied before and after the onset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Before leukemia was diagnosed, the patient had a lymphocyte clone with a 14q translocation. This clone appears to have given rise to the leukemic cells. We hypothesize that structural rearrangement of 14q is directly related to abnormal growth of lymphocytes and that it may be a step toward the development of lymphoid malignancies. Increasing evidence, provided by others, for the nonrandom involvement of 14q in African-type Burkitts lymphoma and other lymphoid neoplasms further strengthens this hypothesis.. 

chromosome instability
ATM phosphorylates p95/nbs1 in an S-phase checkpoint pathway.
The rare diseases ataxia-telangiectasia (AT), caused by mutations in the ATM gene, and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), with mutations in the p95/nbs1 gene, share a variety of phenotypic abnormalities such as chromosomal instability, radiation sensitivity and defects in cell-cycle checkpoints in response to ionizing radiation. The ATM gene encodes a protein kinase that is activated by ionizing radiation or radiomimetic drugs, whereas p95/nbs1 is part of a protein complex that is involved in responses to DNA double-strand breaks. Here, because of the similarities between AT and NBS, we evaluated the functional interactions between ATM and p95/nbs1. Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and induction of ATM-dependent responses in NBS cells indicated that p95/nbs1 may not be required for signalling to ATM after ionizing radiation. However, p95/nbs1 was phosphorylated on serine 343 in an ATM-dependent manner in vitro and in vivo after ionizing radiation. A p95/nbs1 construct mutated at the ATM phosphorylation site abrogated an S-phase checkpoint induced by ionizing radiation in normal cells and failed to compensate for this functional deficiency in NBS cells. These observations link ATM and p95/nbs1 in a common signalling pathway and provide an explanation for phenotypic similarities in these two diseases.. 

chromosomal instability