Increased high-density lipoprotein levels caused by a common cholesteryl-ester transfer protein gene mutation.
BACKGROUND AND METHODS. The plasma cholesteryl-ester transfer protein (CETP) catalyzes the transfer of cholesteryl esters from high-density lipoprotein (HDL) to other lipoproteins. We recently described a Japanese family with increased HDL levels and CETP deficiency due to a splicing defect of the CETP gene. To assess the frequency and phenotype of this condition, we screened 11 additional families with high HDL levels by means of a radioimmunoassay for CETP and DNA analysis. RESULTS. We found the same CETP gene mutation in four families from three different regions of Japan. Analysis of restriction-fragment-length polymorphisms of the mutant CETP allele showed that all probands were homozygous for the identical haplotype. Family members homozygous for CETP deficiency (n = 10) had moderate hypercholesterolemia (mean total cholesterol level [+/- SD], 7. 01 +/- 0. 83 mmol per liter), markedly increased levels of HDL cholesterol (4. 24 +/- 1. 01 mmol per liter) and apolipoprotein A-I, and decreased levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (1. 99 +/- 0. 80 mmol per liter) and apolipoprotein B. Members heterozygous for the deficiency (n = 20), whose CETP levels were in the lower part of the normal range, had moderately increased levels of HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein A-I and an increased ratio of HDL subclass 2 to HDL subclass 3, as compared with unaffected family members (1. 5 +/- 0. 8 vs. 0. 7 +/- 0. 4). CETP deficiency was not found in six unrelated subjects with elevated HDL cholesterol levels who were from different parts of the United States. CONCLUSIONS. CETP deficiency appears to be a frequent cause of increased HDL levels in the population of Japan, possibly because of a founder effect. The results that we observed in heterozygotes suggest that CETP normally plays a part in the regulation of levels of HDL subclass 2. There was no evidence of premature atherosclerosis in the families with CETP deficiency. In fact, the lipoprotein profile of persons with CETP deficiency is potentially antiatherogenic and may be associated with an increased life span.  

premature atherosclerosis
Markedly accelerated catabolism of apolipoprotein A-II (ApoA-II) and high density lipoproteins containing ApoA-II in classic lecithin: cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency and fish-eye disease.
Classic (complete) lecithin  cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) deficiency and Fish-eye disease (partial LCAT deficiency) are genetic syndromes associated with markedly decreased plasma levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol but not with an increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. We investigated the metabolism of the HDL apolipoproteins (apo) apoA-I and apoA-II in a total of five patients with LCAT deficiency, one with classic LCAT deficiency and four with Fish-eye disease. Plasma levels of apoA-II were decreased to a proportionately greater extent (23% of normal) than apoA-I (30% of normal). In addition, plasma concentrations of HDL particles containing both apoA-I and apoA-II (LpA-I  A-II) were much lower (18% of normal) than those of particles containing only apoA-I (LpA-I) (51% of normal). The metabolic basis for the low levels of apoA-II and LpA-I  A-II was investigated in all five patients using both exogenous radiotracer and endogenous stable isotope labeling techniques. The mean plasma residence time of apoA-I was decreased at 2. 08 +/- 0. 27 d (controls 4. 74 +/- 0. 65 days); however, the residence time of apoA-II was even shorter at 1. 66 +/- 0. 24 d (controls 5. 25 +/- 0. 61 d). In addition, the catabolism of apoA-I in LpA-I  A-II was substantially faster than that of apoA-I in LpA-I. In summary, genetic syndromes of either complete or partial LCAT deficiency result in low levels of HDL through preferential hypercatabolism of apoA-II and HDL particles containing apoA-II. Because LpA-I has been proposed to be more protective than LpA-I  A-II against atherosclerosis, this selective effect on the metabolism of LpA-I  A-II may provide a potential explanation why patients with classic LCAT deficiency and Fish-eye disease are not at increased risk for premature atherosclerosis despite markedly decreased levels of HDL cholesterol and apoA-I 

atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
atherosclerosis
atherosclerosis
Targeted modification of the apolipoprotein B gene results in hypobetalipoproteinemia and developmental abnormalities in mice.
Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia is an autosomal codominant disorder resulting in a dramatic reduction in plasma concentrations of apolipoprotein (apo) B, cholesterol, and beta-migrating lipoproteins. A benefit of hypobetalipoproteinemia is that mildly affected individuals may be protected from coronary vascular disease. We have used gene targeting to generate mice with a modified Apob allele. Mice containing this allele display all of the hallmarks of human hypobetalipoproteinemia  they produce a truncated apoB protein, apoB70, and have markedly decreased plasma concentrations of apoB, beta-lipoproteins, and total cholesterol. In addition, the mice manifest several characteristics that are occasionally observed in human hypobetalipoproteinemia, including reduced plasma triglyceride concentrations, fasting chylomicronemia, and reduced high density lipoprotein cholesterol. An unexpected finding is that the modified Apob allele is strongly associated with exencephalus and hydrocephalus. These mice should help increase our understanding of hypobetalipoproteinemia, atherogenesis, and the etiology of exencephalus and hydrocephalus.. 

atherogenesis
Frequency of exon 15 missense mutation (442D:G) in cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene in hyperalphalipoproteinemic Japanese subjects.
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) transfers cholesteryl ester from high density lipoprotein (HDL) to apo B-containing lipoproteins. The hyperalphalipoproteinemia caused by CETP deficiency is fairly common in Japan and one of the most common mutations in the CETP gene is the splicing defect of the intron 14, the allelic frequency of which has been shown to be 0. 0049 in the Japanese general population. Recently, we have reported a missense mutation in exon 15 of the CETP gene (442D  G), showing a dominant effect on the CETP activity and HDL-cholesterol level. In the current study, we determined the frequency of this new mutation in Japanese hyperalphalipoproteinemic (HDL-cholesterol > or = 100 mg/dl) subjects. A rapid and easy screening method for this new mutation was developed using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) -mediated site-directed mutagenesis. Among 117 Japanese hyperalphalipoproteinemic subjects (HDL-cholesterol; 116. 7 +/- 16. 5 mg/dl, mean +/- S. D.) without the intron 14 splice defect, three homozygotes (2. 5%) and 34 heterozygotes (29. 1%) were found to have the 442D  G mutation. The relative allelic frequency of this mutation was calculated to be 0. 17. One of the homozygotes for the 442D  G mutation was the patient previously described by us as having hyperalphalipoproteinemia with corneal opacity and coronary heart disease. This was the first reported subject homozygous for the CETP deficiency who also demonstrated atherosclerotic symptoms. In homozygous subjects, CETP activity ranged from 37% to 62% of the normal value, which was consistent with the results obtained from the transient expression experiment previously reported; however, the specific activity of CETP was not as low as expected. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) 

atherosclerotic symptoms
A missense mutation in the cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene with possible dominant effects on plasma high density lipoproteins.
Plasma HDL are a negative risk factor for atherosclerosis. Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP; 476 amino acids) transfers cholesteryl ester from HDL to other lipoproteins. Subjects with homozygous CETP deficiency caused by a gene splicing defect have markedly elevated HDL; however, heterozygotes have only mild increases in HDL. We describe two probands with a CETP missense mutation (442 D  G). Although heterozygous, they have threefold increases in HDL concentration and markedly decreased plasma CETP mass and activity, suggesting that the mutation has dominant effects on CETP and HDL in vivo. Cellular expression of mutant cDNA results in secretion of only 30% of wild type CETP activity. Moreover, coexpression of wild type and mutant cDNAs leads to inhibition of wild type secretion and activity. The dominant effects of the CETP missense mutation during cellular expression probably explains why the probands have markedly increased HDL in the heterozygous state, and suggests that the active molecular species of CETP may be multimeric.. 

atherosclerosis