Uncoupling of hypomyelination and glial cell death by a mutation in the proteolipid protein gene.
Proteolipid protein (PLP; M (r) 30, 000) is a highly conserved major polytopic membrane protein in myelin but its cellular function remains obscure. Neurological mutant mice can often provide model systems for human genetic disorders . Mutations of the X-chromosome-linked PLP gene are lethal, identified first in the jimpy mouse and subsequently in patients with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. The unexplained phenotype of these mutations includes degeneration and premature cell death of oligodendrocytes with associated hypomyelination. Here we show that a new mouse mutant rumpshaker is defined by the amino-acid substitution Ile-to-Thr at residue 186 in a membrane-embedded domain of PLP. Surprisingly, rumpshaker mice, although myelin-deficient, have normal longevity and a full complement of morphologically normal oligodendrocytes. Hypomyelination can thus be genetically separated from the PLP-dependent oligodendrocyte degeneration. We suggest that PLP has a vital function in glial cell development, distinct from its later role in myelin assembly, and that this dichotomy of action may explain the clinical spectrum of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.. 

degeneration and premature cell death of oligodendrocytes
oligodendrocyte degeneration
Brain disease and molecular analysis in myotonic dystrophy.
Abnormal amplification of a CTG repeat on chromosome 19 is the molecular basis of myotonic dystrophy (DM). Expansion of the repeat has been correlated with severity of several clinical features of the disease. We performed extensive cognitive testing, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a molecular analysis in 28 cases of DM to determine the relationship between the molecular defect and brain disease. Performance in two or more cognitive tests was pathological in 10 cases. Fourteen patients had subcortical white matter lesions on MRI, 14 had cerebral atrophy. Amplification of the CTG repeat showed a strong correlation with cognitive test deficits when exceeding a length of over 1000 trinucleotides. MRI lesions were associated with impaired psychometric performance, but MRI and molecular findings were only weakly related. Disease duration influenced the appearance and amount of white matter lesions on MRI. Quantification of CTG repeat size may allow an early estimate on the probability of brain involvement in DM; cognitive dysfunction is associated with white matter lesions and cerebral atrophy later on in the course.. 

white matter lesions
white matter lesions
white matter lesions
A new CT pattern in adrenoleukodystrophy.
A new CT pattern was observed in 2 patients with adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). This pattern, which the authors call Type II, is characterized by the absence of posterior periventricular areas of decreased attenuation around the trigone on non-contrast scans  after contrast infusion, however, there is striking enhancement of various white-matter structures (tracts or fiber systems) such as the internal capsules, corpus callosum, corona radiata, forceps major, and cerebral peduncles. This is different from numerous previous descriptions of the CT pattern in ALD. Type II ALD does not appear to have been seen in any other leukoencephalopathy and is probably specific for a phenotypic variant or an evolving stage of ALD.. 

leukoencephalopathy