Retinoschisin, the X-linked retinoschisis protein, is a secreted photoreceptor protein, and is expressed and released by Weri-Rb1 cells.
X-linked retinoschisis is characterized by microcystic-like changes of the macular region and schisis within the inner retinal layers, leading to visual deterioration in males. Many missense and protein-truncating mutations of the causative gene RS1 have now been identified and are thought to be inactivating. RS1 encodes a 224 amino acid protein, retinoschisin, which contains a discoidin domain but is of unknown function. We have generated a polyclonal antibody against a peptide from a unique region within retinoschisin, which detects a protein of approximately 28 kDa in retinal samples reduced with dithiothreitol, but multimers sized > 40 kDa under non-reducing conditions. A screen of human tissues with this antibody reveals retinoschisin to be retina specific and the antibody detects a protein of similar size in bovine and murine retinae. We investigated the expression pattern in the retina of both RS1 mRNA (using in situ hybridization with riboprobes) and retinoschisin (using immunohistochemistry). The antisense riboprobe detected RS1 mRNA only in the photoreceptor layer but the protein product of the gene was present both in the photoreceptors and within the inner portions of the retina. Furthermore, differentiated retinoblastoma cells (Weri-Rb1 cells) were found to express RS1 mRNA and to release retinoschisin. These results suggest that retinoschisin is released by photo-receptors and has functions within the inner retinal layers. Thus, X-linked retinoschisis is caused by abnormalities in a putative secreted photoreceptor protein and is the first example of a secreted photo-receptor protein associated with a retinal dystrophy.. 

retinal dystrophy
X-linked retinoschisis with point mutations in the XLRS1 gene.
BACKGROUND  X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS) is a relatively rare vitreoretinal dystrophy that causes visual loss in young men. Recently, a gene responsible for this disease, designated XLRS1, was identified, and several deleterious gene mutations were reported. OBJECTIVE  To analyze Japanese patients clinically diagnosed as having XLRS formutational changes in the XLRS1 gene. METHODS  Ten patients with XLRS underwent full ophthalmologic examination, including slitlamp biomicroscopy and dilated funduscopy. Genomic DNA was isolated from leukocytes, and all exons of the XLRS1 gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and analyzed using a direct sequencing method. RESULTS  Point mutations in the XLRS1 gene were identified in all 10 patients. The mutations were identical in each of 2 pairs of brothers. Six of the point mutations represented missense mutations, 1 was a nonsense mutation, and 1 was a frameshift mutation. Five of the mutations are newly reported herein. CONCLUSIONS  The discovery of new point mutations in this study increases the available information regarding the spectrum of genetic abnormalities and clinical manifestations of XLRS. However, the limited data failed to reveal a correlation between mutation and disease phenotype. CLINICAL RELEVANCE  Identification of mutations in the XLRS1 gene and expanded information on clinical manifestations will facilitate early diagnosis, appropriate early therapy, and genetic counseling regarding the prognosis of XLRS.. 

vitreoretinal dystrophy
Homozygosity mapping in a family with microcephaly, mental retardation, and short stature to a Cohen syndrome region on 8q21.3-8q22.1: redefining a clinical entity.
A syndrome of microcephaly, progressive postnatal growth deficiency, and mental retardation was observed in two brothers and their cousin from a multiply consanguineous kindred of Lebanese descent. Hypotonia, chorioretinal dystrophy, and myopia were also identified. The severity of the condition varied among the closely related patients. Because of absence of a distinctive facial appearance, the degree of mental retardation, and short stature, the initially considered clinical diagnosis of Cohen syndrome was withdrawn and a novel genetic entity was assumed. Homozygosity mapping in this family assigned the gene to a 26. 8-cM region on the chromosome band 8q21. 3 -22. 1, between the microsatellites at D8S270 and D8S514. The maximum two-point LOD score was found for marker at D8S267 (Zmax = 3.. 237 at Omax = 0. 00). Intriguingly enough, the identified gene region overlaps the refined gene region for Cohen syndrome (COH1) [Kolehmainen et al., 1997  Euro J Hum Genet 5  206-213]. This fact encourages the hypothesis that the described kindred segregates for a variant of Cohen syndrome and suggests a redefinition of its phenotype 

chorioretinal dystrophy
Restoration of photoreceptor ultrastructure and function in retinal degeneration slow mice by gene therapy.
The gene Prph2 encodes a photoreceptor-specific membrane glycoprotein, peripherin-2 (also known as peripherin/rds), which is inserted into the rims of photoreceptor outer segment discs in a complex with rom-1 (ref. 2). The complex is necessary for the stabilization of the discs, which are renewed constantly throughout life, and which contain the visual pigments necessary for photon capture. Mutations in Prph2 have been shown to result in a variety of photoreceptor dystrophies, including autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa and macular dystrophy. A common feature of these diseases is the loss of photoreceptor function, also seen in the retinal degeneration slow (rds or Prph2 Rd2/Rd2) mouse, which is homozygous for a null mutation in Prph2. It is characterized by a complete failure to develop photoreceptor discs and outer segments, downregulation of rhodopsin and apoptotic loss of photoreceptor cells. The electroretinograms (ERGs) of Prph2Rd2/Rd2 mice have greatly diminished a-wave and b-wave amplitudes, which decline to virtually undetectable concentrations by two months. Subretinal injection of recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) encoding a Prph2 transgene results in stable generation of outer segment structures and formation of new stacks of discs containing both perpherin-2 and rhodopsin, which in many cases are morphologically similar to normal outer segments. Moreover, the re-establishment of the structural integrity of the photoreceptor layer also results in electrophysiological correction. These studies demonstrate for the first time that a complex ultrastructural cell defect can be corrected both morphologically and functionally by in vivo gene transfer.. 

photoreceptor dystrophies