Relationship among genotype, biochemical phenotype, and cognitive performance in females with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: report from the Maternal Phenylketonuria Collaborative Study.
OBJECTIVE  To examine the relationship of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes to biochemical phenotype and cognitive development in maternal phenylketonuria (PKU). METHODOLOGY  PAH gene mutations were examined in 222 hyperphenylalaninemic females enrolled in the Maternal PKU Collaborative Study (MPKUCS). A total of 84 different mutations were detected, and complete genotype was obtained in 199 individuals. Based on previous knowledge about mutation-phenotype associations, 78 of the mutations could be assigned to one of four classes of severity (severe PKU, moderate PKU, mild PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia [MHP]). Then, 189 MPKUCS subjects were grouped according to the various combinations of mutation classifications. The sample sizes were large enough for statistical testing in four groups with at least one mutation that completely abolishes enzyme activity. These patients are considered functionally hemizygous. RESULTS  The biochemical phenotype predicted from the genotype in functionally hemizygous patients was related significantly to the assigned phenylalanine level. Cognitive performance (IQ) was also significantly related to genotype. The IQ of PAH-deficient mothers with a severe PKU mutation in combination with a MHP mutation or a mild PKU mutation was 99 and 96, respectively, whereas the IQ of PKU mothers with two severe PKU mutations or with one severe and one moderate PKU mutation was 83 and 84, respectively. Of the patients with PKU, 92% had been treated during childhood. Those who were untreated or treated late had lower than average IQ scores for their group of mutation combinations. Females with moderate or mild PKU who were treated early and treated for > 6 years showed IQ scores 10 points above average for their group. CONCLUSIONS  The reproductive outcome in maternal phenylketonuria is dependent on prenatal metabolic control and postnatal environmental circumstances. Both factors depend on the intellectual resources of the mother with PKU. The significant relationship among genotype, biochemical phenotype, and cognitive performance observed in the present study is of importance for the development of an optimal strategy for future treatment of females with PKU who plan pregnancy.. 

phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency
PAH-deficient
An amino-acid substitution involved in phenylketonuria is in linkage disequilibrium with DNA haplotype 2.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive human genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase, EC 1. 14. 16. 1). PKU is a common inborn error of amino-acid metabolism in caucasian populations and approximately 1 in 50 individuals are carriers of a PKU allele. To define the molecular basis of PKU, we characterized twelve restriction fragment-length polymorphism (RFLP) haplotypes of the PAH locus in the northern European population and observed that 90% of the PKU alleles in this population are confined to four common RFLP haplotypes. We have recently reported a splicing mutation in the PAH gene that is associated with RFLP haplotype 3 which is present at about 40% of mutant alleles. We now report the molecular lesion associated with the RFLP haplotype 2 mutant allele. This defect is caused by a C-to-T transition in exon 12 resulting in an amino-acid substitution (Arg to Trp) at residue 408 of PAH. Direct hybridization analysis of the point mutation using a specific oligonucleotide probe demonstrated that this mutation is also in linkage disequilibrium with RFLP haplotype 2 alleles that make up about 20% of mutant PAH genes 

deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase
Gene transfer and expression of human phenylalanine hydroxylase.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by a genetic deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). A full-length complementary DNA clone of human PAH was inserted into a eukaryotic expression vector and transferred into mouse NIH3T3 cells which do not normally express PAH. The transformed mouse cells expressed PAH messenger RNA, immunoreactive protein, and enzymatic activity that are characteristic of the normal human liver products, demonstrating that a single gene contains all of the necessary genetic information to code for functional PAH. These results support the use of the human PAH probe in prenatal diagnosis and detection of carriers, to provide new opportunities for the biochemical characterization of normal and mutant enzymes, and in the investigation of alternative genetic therapies for PKU.. 

deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase
Molecular genetics of PKU in eastern Europe: a nonsense mutation associated with haplotype 4 of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic disorder secondary to a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Several mutations in the PAH gene have recently been reported, and linkage disequilibrium was observed between RFLP haplotypes and specific mutations. A new molecular lesion has been identified in exon 7 of the PAH gene in a Hungarian PKU patient by direct sequencing of PCR-amplified DNA. The C-to-T transition causes the substitution of Arg243 to a termination codon, and the mutant allele is associated with haplotype 4 of the PAH gene. The mutation is present in two of nine mutant haplotype 4 alleles among Eastern Europeans and is not present among Western Europeans and Asians. The rarity of this mutant allele and its restricted geographic distribution suggest that the mutational event occurred recently on a normal haplotype 4 background in Eastern Europe.. 

deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase
GT to AT transition at a splice donor site causes skipping of the preceding exon in phenylketonuria.
Classical Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive human genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). We isolated several mutant PAH cDNA clones from a PKU carrier individual and showed that they contained an internal 116 base pair deletion, corresponding precisely to exon 12 of the human chromosomal PAH gene. The deletion causes the synthesis of a truncated protein lacking the C-terminal 52 amino acids. Gene transfer and expression studies using the mutant PAH cDNA indicated that the deletion abolishes PAH activity in the cell as a result of protein instability. To determine the molecular basis of the deletion, the mutant chromosomal PAH gene was isolated from this individual and shown to contain a GT-- greater than AT substitution at the 5 splice donor site of intron 12. Thus, the consequence of the splice donor site mutation in the human liver is the skipping of the preceding exon during RNA splicing.. 

deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase
Two distinct mutations at a single BamHI site in phenylketonuria.
Classical phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The abolition of an invariant BamHI site located in the coding sequence of the PAH gene (exon 7) led to the recognition of two new point mutations at codon 272 and 273 (272gly----stop and 273ser----phe, respectively). Both mutations were detected in north eastern France or Belgium and occurred on the background of RFLP haplotype 7 alleles. The present study supports the view that the clinical heterogeneity in PKU is accounted for by the large variety of mutant genotypes associated with PAH deficiencies.. 

deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase
PAH deficiencies
Retroviral-mediated gene transfer of human phenylalanine hydroxylase into NIH 3T3 and hepatoma cells.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). A full-length human PAH cDNA sequence has been inserted into pzip-neoSV (X), which is a retroviral vector containing the bacterial neo gene. The recombinant has been transfected into psi 2 cells, which provide synthesis of the retroviral capsid. Recombinant virus was detected in the culture medium of the transfected psi 2 cells, which is capable of transmitting the human PAH gene into mouse NIH 3T3 cells by infection leading to stable incorporation of the recombinant provirus. Infected cells express PAH mRNA, immunoreactive PAH protein, and exhibit pterin-dependent phenylalanine hydroxylase activity. The recombinant virus is also capable of infecting a mouse hepatoma cell line that does not normally synthesize PAH. PAH activity is present in the cellular extracts and the entire hydroxylation system is reconstituted in the hepatoma cells infected with the recombinant viruses. Thus, recombinant viruses containing human PAH cDNA provide a means for introducing functional PAH into mammalian cells of hepatic origin and can potentially be introduced into whole animals as a model for somatic gene therapy for PKU.. 

deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase
Regional mapping of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene and the phenylketonuria locus in the human genome.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder of amino acid metabolism caused by a deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH; phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase, EC 1. 14. 16. 1). A cDNA clone for human PAH has previously been used to assign the corresponding gene to human chromosome 12. To define the regional map position of the disease locus and the PAH gene on human chromosome 12, DNA was isolated from human-hamster somatic cell hybrids with various deletions of human chromosome 12 and was analyzed by Southern blot analysis using the human cDNA PAH clone as a hybridization probe. From these results, together with detailed biochemical and cytogenetic characterization of the hybrid cells, the region on chromosome 12 containing the human PAH gene has been defined as 12q14. 3----qter 3----qter. The PAH map position on chromosome 12 was further localized by in situ hybridization of 125I-labeled human PAH cDNA to chromosomes prepared from a human lymphoblastoid cell line. Results of these experiments demonstrated that the region on chromosome 12 containing the PAH gene and the PKU locus in man is 12q22----12q24. 1. These results not only provide a regionalized map position for a major human disease locus but also can serve as a reference point for linkage analysis with other DNA markers on human chromosome 12 

deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase
A 3-base pair in-frame deletion of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene results in a kinetic variant of phenylketonuria.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease due to deficiency of a hepatic enzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The absence of PAH activity results in typical PKU while persistence of a residual enzyme activity gives rise to variant forms of the disease. We report here a 3-base pair in-frame deletion of the PAH gene (delta 194) in a mild variant, with markedly reduced affinity of the enzyme for phenylalanine (Km = 160 nM), and we provide functional evidence for responsibility of the deletion in the mutant phenotype. Since the deletion was located in the third exon of the gene, which presents no homology with other hydroxylases, we suggest that exon 3 is involved in the specificity of the enzyme for phenylalanine. Finally, since none of the 98 PKU patients tested were found to carry this particular deletion, our study suggests that this molecular event probably occurred recently on the background of a haplotype 2 gene in Portugal.. 

deficiency of a hepatic enzyme, phenylalanine hydroxylase
Multiple origins for phenylketonuria in Europe.
Phenylketonuria (PKU), a disorder of amino acid metabolism prevalent among Caucasians and other ethnic groups, is caused primarily by a deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). PKU is a highly heterogeneous disorder, with more than 60 molecular lesions identified in the PAH gene. The haplotype associations, relative frequencies, and distributions of five prevalent PAH mutations (R158Q, R261Q, IVS10nt546, R408W, and IVS12n1) were established in a comprehensive European sample population and subsequently were examined to determine the potential roles of several genetic mechanisms in explaining the present distribution of the major PKU alleles. Each of these five mutations was strongly associated with only one of the more than 70 chromosomal haplotypes defined by eight RFLPs in or near the PAH gene. These findings suggest that each of these mutations arose through a single founding event that occurred within time periods ranging from several hundred to several thousand years ago. From the significant differences observed in the relative frequencies and distributions of these five alleles throughout Europe, four of these putative founding events could be localized to specific ethnic subgroups. Together, these data suggest that there were multiple, geographically and ethnically distinct origins for PKU within the European population.. 

deficiency of the hepatic enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase