Changes at P183 of emerin weaken its protein-protein interactions resulting in X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy characterized by early contractures of the elbows, Achilles tendons and spine, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and cardiomyopathy associated with cardiac conduction defects. The emerin gene has been mapped to Xq28 and encodes a 34-kDa serine-rich protein, emerin, which has been localized to the nuclear envelope in a wide variety of tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mutations spanning the emerin gene have been identified in patients with EDMD. We present here the effect, on emerin protein expression, of two missense mutations identified in unrelated EDMD patients. These alterations predict the replacement of a proline residue at position 183 with either a histidine or a threonine. Biochemical analysis has demonstrated that the mobility and expression levels of the mutant forms of emerin are indistinguishable from that of wild-type emerin, but that they have weakened interactions with nuclear lamina components. In comparison with the usual EDMD phenotype, patients with P183 missense mutations have a later age at onset of first symptoms, elbow contractures, ankle contractures, upper limb weakness and lower limb weakness, but there is no difference for the age at onset of cardiac involvement. This is the first report of protein studies on patients with missense mutations resulting in the clinical features of EDMD. These studies demonstrate the importance of proline 183 for the proper structure/function of emerin.. 

cardiac conduction defects
Mice deficient in Six5 develop cataracts: implications for myotonic dystrophy.
Expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in the 3 UTR of the gene DMPK at the DM1 locus on chromosome 19 causes myotonic dystrophy, a dominantly inherited disease characterized by skeletal muscle dystrophy and myotonia, cataracts and cardiac conduction defects. Targeted deletion of Dm15, the mouse orthologue of human DMPK, produced mice with a mild myopathy and cardiac conduction abnormalities, but without other features of myotonic dystrophy, such as myotonia and cataracts. We, and others, have demonstrated that repeat expansion decreases expression of the adjacent gene SIX5 (refs 7, 8), which encodes a homeodomain transcription factor. To determine whether SIX5 deficiency contributes to the myotonic dystrophy phenotype, we disrupted mouse Six5 by replacing the first exon with a beta-galactosidase reporter. Six5-mutant mice showed reporter expression in multiple tissues, including the developing lens. Homozygous mutant mice had no apparent abnormalities of skeletal muscle function, but developed lenticular opacities at a higher rate than controls. Our results suggest that SIX5 deficiency contributes to the cataract phenotype in myotonic dystrophy, and that myotonic dystrophy represents a multigenic disorder.. 

cardiac conduction defects