An error in dystrophin mRNA processing in golden retriever muscular dystrophy, an animal homologue of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Golden retriever muscular dystrophy (GRMD) is a spontaneous, X-linked, progressively fatal disease of dogs and is also a homologue of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Two-thirds of DMD patients carry detectable deletions in their dystrophin gene. The defect underlying the remaining one-third of DMD patients is undetermined. Analysis of the canine dystrophin gene in normal and GRMD dogs has failed to demonstrate any detectable loss of exons. Here, we have demonstrated a RNA processing error in GRMD that results from a single base change in the 3 consensus splice site of intron 6. The seventh exon is then skipped, which predicts a termination of the dystrophin reading frame within its N-terminal domain in exon 8. This is the first example of dystrophin deficiency caused by a splice-site mutation.. 

dystrophin deficiency
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and myotonic dystrophy in the same patient.
We report on the first patient identified with myotonic dystrophy and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). The family of the propositus had a strong history of myotonic dystrophy, and there was an intrafamilial pathological expansion of the responsible CTG repeat between the mildly affected mother (160 repeats; normal 27 repeats) and her more severely affected son (650 repeats), and his sister (650 repeats). The propositus was an isolated case of Duchenne muscular dystrophy with marked dystrophin deficiency in muscle biopsy. The patient was still ambulatory post age 16. Myotonic dystrophy could interfere to some extent with the progression of Duchenne dystrophy. However, other interpretations are possible. Twelve percent of dystrophin revertant fibers as observed by immunohistochemistry could be sufficient to ameliorate typical DMD clinical severity, or the patient may present a somatic mosaic. The pathophysiological interactions of these two unlinked disorders are discussed at the clinical and histopathological levels.. 

dystrophin deficiency