Isolation of the mouse homologue of BRCA1 and genetic mapping to mouse chromosome 11.
The BRCA1 gene is in large part responsible for hereditary human breast and ovarian cancer. Here we report the isolation of the murine Brca1 homologue cDNA clones. In addition, we identified genomic P1 clones that contain most, if not all, of the mouse Brca1 locus. DNA sequence analysis revealed that the mouse and human coding regions are 75% identical at the nucleotide level while the predicted amino acid identity is only 58%. A DNA sequence variant in the Brca1 locus was identified and used to map this gene on a (Mus m. musculus Czech II x C57BL/KsJ) F1 x C57BL/KsJ intersubspecific backcross to distal mouse chromosome 11. The mapping of this gene to a region highly syntenic with human chromosome 17, coupled with Southern and Northern analyses, confirms that we isolated the murine Brca1 homologue rather than a related RING finger gene. The isolation of the mouse Brca1 homologue will facilitate the creation of mouse models for germline BRCA1 defects.. 

BRCA1 defects
Aberrant subcellular localization of BRCA1 in breast cancer.
The BRCA1 gene product was identified as a 220-kilodalton nuclear phosphoprotein in normal cells, including breast ductal epithelial cells, and in 18 of 20 tumor cell lines derived from tissues other than breast and ovary. In 16 of 17 breast and ovarian cancer lines and 17 of 17 samples of cells obtained from malignant effusions, however, BRCA1 localized mainly in cytoplasm. Absence of BRCA1 or aberrant subcellular location was also observed to a variable extent in histological sections of many breast cancer biopsies. These findings suggest that BRCA1 abnormalities may be involved in the pathogenesis of many breast cancers, sporadic as well as familial.. 

BRCA1 abnormalities
Founder mutations in the BRCA1 gene in Polish families with breast-ovarian cancer.
We have undertaken a hospital-based study, to identify possible BRCA1 and BRCA2 founder mutations in the Polish population. The study group consisted of 66 Polish families with cancer who have at least three related females affected with breast or ovarian cancer and who had cancer diagnosed, in at least one of the three affected females, at age < 50 years. A total of 26 families had both breast and ovarian cancers, 4 families had ovarian cancers only, and 36 families had breast cancers only. Genomic DNA was prepared from the peripheral blood leukocytes of at least one affected woman from each family. The entire coding region of BRCA1 and BRCA2 was screened for the presence of germline mutations, by use of SSCP followed by direct sequencing of observed variants. Mutations were found in 35 (53%) of the 66 families studied. All but one of the mutations were detected within the BRCA1 gene. BRCA1 abnormalities were identified in all four families with ovarian cancer only, in 67% of 27 families with both breast and ovarian cancer, and in 34% of 35 families with breast cancer only. The single family with a BRCA2 mutation had the breast-ovarian cancer syndrome. Seven distinct mutations were identified; five of these occurred in two or more families. In total, recurrent mutations were found in 33 (94%) of the 35 families with detected mutations. Three BRCA1 abnormalities - 5382insC, C61G, and 4153delA - accounted for 51%, 20%, and 11% of the identified mutations, respectively.. 

BRCA1 abnormalities
BRCA1 abnormalities
Clinicopathologic features of BRCA-linked and sporadic ovarian cancer.
CONTEXT  Most hereditary ovarian cancers are associated with germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Attempts to define the clinical significance of BRCA mutation status in ovarian cancer have produced conflicting results, especially regarding survival. OBJECTIVE  To determine whether hereditary ovarian cancers have distinct clinical and pathological features compared with sporadic (nonhereditary) ovarian cancers. DESIGN AND SETTING  Retrospective cohort study of a consecutive series of 933 ovarian cancers diagnosed and treated at our institution, which is a comprehensive cancer center as designated by the National Cancer Institute, over a 12-year period (December 1986 to August 1998). PATIENTS  The study was restricted to patients of Jewish origin because of the ease of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genotyping in this ethnic group. From the 189 patients who identified themselves as Jewish, 88 hereditary cases were identified with the presence of a germline founder mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2. The remaining 101 cases from the same series not associated with a BRCA mutation and 2 additional groups (Gynecologic Oncology Group protocols 52 and 111) with ovarian cancer from clinical trials (for the survival analysis) were included for comparison. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES  Age at diagnosis, surgical stage, histologic cell type and grade, and surgical outcome; and response to chemotherapy and survival for advanced-stage (II and IV) cases. RESULTS  Hereditary cancers were rarely diagnosed before age 40 years and were common after age 60 years, with mean age at diagnosis being significantly younger for BRCA1- vs BRCA2-linked patients (54 vs 62 years; P =. 04). Histology, grade, stage, and success of cytoreductive surgery were similar for hereditary and sporadic cases. The hereditary group had a longer disease-free interval following primary chemotherapy in comparison with the nonhereditary group, with a median time to recurrence of 14 months and 7 months, respectively (P <. 001). Those with hereditary cancers had improved survival compared with the nonhereditary group (P =. 004). For stage III cancers, BRCA mutation status was an independent prognostic variable (P =. 03). CONCLUSIONS  Although BRCA-associated hereditary ovarian cancers in this population have surgical and pathological characteristics similar to those of sporadic cancers, advanced-stage hereditary cancer patients survive longer than nonhereditary cancer patients. Age penetrance is greater for BRCA1-linked than for BRCA2-linked cancers in this population.

BRCA-linked and sporadic ovarian cancer
BRCA-associated hereditary ovarian cancers
BRCA1-linked than for BRCA2-linked cancers
Brca1 deficiency results in early embryonic lethality characterized by neuroepithelial abnormalities.
The breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA1, has been cloned and shown to encode a zinc-finger protein of unknown function. Mutations in BRCA1 account for at least 80% of families with both breast and ovarian cancer, as well as some non-familial sporadic ovarian cancers. The loss of wild-type BRCA1 in tumours of individuals carrying one nonfunctional BRCA1 allele suggests that BRCA1 encodes a tumour suppressor that may inhibit the proliferation of mammary epithelial cells. To examine the role of BRCA1 in normal tissue growth and differentiation, and to generate a potential model for the cancer susceptibility associated with loss of BRCA1 function, we have created a mouse line carrying a mutation in one Brca1 allele. Analysis of mice homozygous for the mutant allele indicate that Brca1 is critical for normal development, as these mice died in utero between 10 and 13 days of gestation (E10-E13). Abnormalities in Brca1-deficient embryos were most evident in the neural tube, with 40% of the embryos presenting with varying degrees of spina bifida and anencephaly. In addition, the neuroepithelium in Brca1-deficient embryos appeared disorganized, with signs of both rapid proliferation and excessive cell death.. 

Brca1 deficiency
Brca1-deficient
Brca1-deficient