PAX6 gene dosage effect in a family with congenital cataracts, aniridia, anophthalmia and central nervous system defects.
The human eye malformation aniridia results from haploinsufficiency of PAX6, a paired box DNA-binding protein. To study this dosage effect, we characterized two PAX6 mutations in a family segregating aniridia and a milder syndrome consisting of congenital cataracts and late onset corneal dystrophy. The nonsense mutations, at codons 103 and 353, truncate PAX6 within the N-terminal paired and C-terminal PST domains, respectively. The wild-type PST domain activates transcription autonomously and the mutant form has partial activity. A compound heterozygote had severe craniofacial and central nervous system defects and no eyes. The pattern of malformations is similar to that in homozygous Sey mice and suggests a critical role for PAX6 in controlling the migration and differentiation of specific neuronal progenitor cells in the brain.. 

haploinsufficiency of PAX6
Three novel aniridia mutations in the human PAX6 gene.
Aniridia (iris hypoplasia) is an autosomal dominant congenital disorder of the eye. Mutations in the human aniridia (PAX6) gene have now been identified in many patients from various ethnic groups. In the study reported here we describe PAX6 mutations in one sporadic and five familial cases with aniridia. Of the four different mutations identified, one was identical to a previously reported mutation (C-- > T transition at codon 240), and three were novel  two in the glycine-rich region and one in the proline/serine/threonine-rich (PST) region. One PAX6 mutation found in the PST region was associated with cataracts in an aniridia family. Another splice mutation in the PST domain occurred in an aniridia patient with anosmia (inability to smell). The six new aniridia cases reported here have mutations predicted to generate incomplete PAX6 proteins. These results support the theory that human aniridia is caused by haploinsufficiency of PAX6.. 

haploinsufficiency of PAX6