Combined genetic deficiency of C6 and C7 in man.
By routine screening of sera, a subject was discovered who showed a sub-total deficiency of C6 and C7. No clinical disease was associated with this deficiency which was transmitted through the subjects family as a single genetic characteristic, the C6 deficiency being associated with a silent allele at the structural locus. The propositus was found to have low quantities of an abnormal C6 which was both antigenically deficient and smaller in size than normal C6 (110, 000 daltons compared with 140, 000 daltons) and small quantities of apparently normal C7. It is concluded that the most likely explanation for this defect is that the subject has a structural mutation in his C6 gene which produces hyopsynthesis not only of C6 but also of the closely linked gene for C7. These findings suggest the possibility that C6 and C7 may function as a single genetic unit and that the primary transcript copied from the genome includes information for both proteins.. 

Combined genetic deficiency of C6 and C7
sub-total deficiency of C6 and C7
C6 deficiency
Human deficiency of the sixth component of complement in a patient with meningococcal meningitis and no haemostasis abnormality.
A case of human complete C6 deficiency is reported. The patient, a 31 year old white male, was seen on the occasion of an isolated episode of meningococcal meningitis. Serum complement hemolytic and bactericidal activities were lacking and could be restored to normal by addition of appropriate amounts of purified C6. No hemostatic abnormalities were observed.. 

deficiency of the sixth component of complement
C6 deficiency
Molecular basis of subtotal complement C6 deficiency. A carboxy-terminally truncated but functionally active C6.
Individuals with subtotal complement C6 deficiency possess a C6 molecule that is 14% shorter than normal C6 and present in low but detectable concentrations (1-2% of the normal mean). We now show that this dysmorphic C6 is bactericidally active and lacks an epitope that was mapped to the most carboxy-terminal part of C6 using C6 cDNA fragments expressed as fusion proteins in the pUEX expression system. We thus predicted that the abnormal C6 molecule might be carboxy-terminally truncated and sought a mutation in an area approximately 14% from the carboxy-terminal end of the coding sequence. By sequencing PCR-amplified products from this region, we found, in three individuals from two families, a mutation that might plausibly be responsible for the defect. All three have an abnormal 5 splice donor site of intron 15, which would probably prevent splicing. An in-frame stop codon is found 17 codons downstream from the intron boundary, which would lead to a truncated polypeptide 13. 5% smaller than normal C6. This result was unexpected, as earlier studies mapped the C5b binding site, or a putative enzymatic region, to this part of C6. Interestingly, all three subjects were probably heterozygous for both subtotal C6 and complete C6 deficiency. 

subtotal complement C6 deficiency
subtotal complement C6 deficiency
subtotal C6 and complete C6 deficiency
Recurrent meningococcal meningitis with absence of the sixth component of complement: an evaluation of underlying immunologic mechanisms.
A 51/2-year-old black girl with recurrent meningococcal meningitis and absence of the sixth component of complement (C6) is reported. To explore the pathogenesis of recurrent neisserial infections in C6 deficiency, a detailed analysis of her immune competence was conducted. Her serum had normal chemotactic, opsonic, alternative complement pathway, and specific antibody activity, but lacked complement-mediated bacteriolytic activity. In addition, her C6-deficient serum was indistinguishable from normal serum in a complement-dependent assay of phagocyte bactericidal activity. Absent bacteriolysis remains the only consistent defect associated with recurrent neisserial infections and absence of one of the late-acting complement components.. 

absence of the sixth component of complement
absence of the sixth component of complement
C6 deficiency
C6-deficient