Autosomal recessive familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus with continued secretion of mutant weakly active vasopressin.
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by post-natal development of arginine vasopressin (AVP) deficiency due to mutations in the AVP gene. All published mutations affect the signal peptide or the neurophysin-II carrier protein and are presumed to interfere with processing of the preprohormone, leading to neuronal damage. We studied an unusual Palestinian family consisting of asymptomatic first cousin parents and three children affected with neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. All three affected children were homozygous and the parents heterozygous for a single novel mutation (C301- > T) in exon 1, replacing Pro7 of mature AVP with Leu (Leu-AVP). Leu-AVP was a weak agonist with approximately 30-fold reduced binding to the human V2 receptor. Measured by radioimmunoassay with a synthetic Leu-AVP standard, serum Leu-AVP levels were elevated in all three children and further increased during water deprivation to as high as 30 times normal. The youngest child (2 years old) was only mildly affected but had Leu-AVP levels similar to her severely affected 8-year-old brother, suggesting that unknown mechanisms may partially compensate for a deficiency of active AVP in very young children.. 

Autosomal recessive familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus
arginine vasopressin (AVP) deficiency
deficiency of active AVP
Molecular analysis in familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus: early diagnosis of an asymptomatic carrier.
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (FNDI) is an inherited deficiency of the hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) and is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. In the present study we have analyzed the AVP-neurophysin II (AVP-NPII) gene in a Spanish kindred. Studies were performed on seven members (four clinically affected) of the family. Patients were diagnosed at the Hospital Universitario Gregorio Maranon (Madrid, Spain). The entire coding region of the AVP-NPII gene of all family members was amplified by PCR and sequenced. All affected individuals presented a missense mutation (G1757-- > A) that replaces glycine at position 23 with arginine within the NPII domain. The substitution was confirmed by restriction endonuclease analysis and was present in heterozygosis. Additionally, one of the asymptomatic relatives (a girl 8 months old at the time of study) was identified as carrier of the same mutation and developed the disease 3 months later. The alteration found in the second exon of the gene in this family seems to be responsible for the disease, as all individuals harboring the mutation had been previously diagnosed or have eventually developed FNDI. Identification of the molecular defect underlying FNDI in affected families is a powerful tool for early asymptomatic diagnosis in infants.. 

familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus
FNDI
deficiency of the hormone arginine vasopressin
FNDI
FNDI
Detection of a novel arginine vasopressin defect by dideoxy fingerprinting.
Autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus is a familial form of diabetes insipidus. This disorder is associated with variable levels of arginine vasopressin (AVP) and diabetes insipidus of varying severity, which responds to exogenous AVP. To determine the molecular basis of autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus, the AVP genes of members of a large kindred were analyzed. A new method, called dideoxy fingerprinting, was used to detect an AVP mutation that was characterized by DNA sequencing. The novel defect found changes the last codon of the AVP signal peptide from alanine to threonine, which should perturb cleavage of mature AVP from its precursor protein and inhibit its secretion or action.. 

Autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus
autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus