Molecular evidence for new mutation at the hprt locus in Lesch-Nyhan patients.
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT; EC2. 4. 2. 8), which functions in the metabolic salvage of purines, is encoded by an X-linked gene in man. Partial HPRT deficiencies are associated with gouty arthritis, while absence of activity results in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (L-N). L-N patients fail to reproduce and the heterozygous state appears to confer no selective advantage. Thus, Haldanes principle predicts that new mutations at the hprt locus must occur frequently in order for L-N syndrome to be maintained in the population. This constant introduction of new mutations would be expected to result in a heterogeneous collection of genetic lesions, some of which may be novel. As we report here, the mutations in the hprt gene of seven L-N patients, selected from an initial survey of 28 patients, have been characterized and all were found to be distinctly different, as predicted. The origin of one unusual mutation has been identified by analysis of DNA from four generations of family members. Further molecular analysis of the origin of new mutations at the hprt locus should aid in resolving the issue of an apparent difference in the frequency of hprt mutations in males and females 

HPRT deficiencies
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency: analysis of HPRT mutations by direct sequencing and allele-specific amplification.
The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a severe X chromosome-linked human disease caused by a virtual absence of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) activity. A partial deficiency in the activity of this enzyme can result in gouty arthritis. To determine the genetic basis for reduction or loss of enzyme activity, we have amplified and sequenced the coding region of HPRT cDNA from four patients  one with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (HPRTPerth) and three with partial deficiencies of HPRT activity, which have been designated HPRTUrangan, HPRTSwan and HPRTToowong. In all four patients, the only mutation identified was a single base substitution in exons 2 or 3 of the coding region, which in each case predicts a single amino acid substitution in the translated protein. Each base change was confirmed by allele-specific amplification of the patients genomic DNA. It is interesting to note that the mutation found for HPRTPerth is identical to that reported for HPRTFlint. It appears that the two mutations are de novo events.. 

Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency
partial deficiencies of HPRT activity