Somatic-cell selection is a major determinant of the blood-cell phenotype in heterozygotes for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase mutations causing severe enzyme deficiency.
X-chromosome inactivation in mammals is regarded as an essentially random process, but the resulting somatic-cell mosaicism creates the opportunity for cell selection. In most people with red-blood-cell glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, the enzyme-deficient phenotype is only moderately expressed in nucleated cells. However, in a small subset of hemizygous males who suffer from chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia, the underlying mutations (designated class I) cause more-severe G6PD deficiency, and this might provide an opportunity for selection in heterozygous females during development. In order to test this possibility we have analyzed four heterozygotes for class I G6PD mutations  two with G6PD Portici (1178G-- > A) and two with G6PD Bari (1187C-- > T). We found that in fractionated blood cell types (including erythroid, myeloid, and lymphoid cell lineages) there was a significant excess of G6PD-normal cells. The significant concordance that we have observed in the degree of imbalance in the different blood-cell lineages indicates that a selective mechanism is likely to operate at the level of pluripotent blood stem cells. Thus, it appears that severe G6PD deficiency affects adversely the proliferation or the survival of nucleated blood cells and that this phenotypic characteristic is critical during hematopoiesis.. 

glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency
G6PD deficiency
G6PD deficiency
Muscle expression of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in different variants.
Muscle expression of G6PD deficiency has been investigated in Mediterranean, Seattle-like and A-variants. G6PD activity was detected in samples obtained from biopsies on the quadriceps muscle of seven males and one female. The type of genetic variant was determined by molecular analysis of DNA, extracted from blood samples. All variants showed the enzyme defect in muscle. A statistically significant relationship was found in the activity of G6PD between erythrocytes and muscle of the male subjects (r = 0. 968; p = 0. 00008). The equation for the best fit line was  Y = 0. 390X + 0. 198 198. The results suggest that, for a given variant, the extent of the enzyme defect in muscle may be determined, using this equation, from the G6PD activity of erythrocytes 

glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
G6PD deficiency
Independent origin of single and double mutations in the human glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase gene.
The vast majority of both polymorphic and sporadic G6PD variants are due to single missense mutations. In the four polymorphic variants that have two point mutations, one of the mutations is always 376 A-- > G (126 Asn-- > Asp), which on its own gives rise to the nondeficient polymorphic variant, G6PD A. In a study of G6PD deficient patients who presented with clinical favism in Spain, we have found a new polymorphic variant that we have called G6PD Malaga, whose only abnormality is a 542 A-- > T (181 Asp-- > Val) mutation. This is the same mutation as previously found in association with the mutation of G6PD A in the double mutant, G6PD Santamaria. G6PD Malaga is associated with enzyme deficiency (class III), and the enzymic properties of G6PD Malaga and G6PD Santamaria are quite similar, indicating that in this case the effects of the two mutations are additive rather than synergistic. G6PD Santamaria might have been produced by recombination between G6PD A and G6PD Malaga; however haplotype analysis, including the use of a new silent polymorphism, suggests that the same 542 A-- > T mutation has taken place independently in a G6PD B gene to give G6PD Malaga and in a G6PD A gene to give G6PD Santamaria. These findings help to outline the relationship and evolution of mutations in the human G6PD locus.. 

G6PD deficient