Targeted disruption of ATM leads to growth retardation, chromosomal fragmentation during meiosis, immune defects, and thymic lymphoma.
ATM, the gene mutated in the inherited human disease ataxia-telangiectasia, is a member of a family of kinases involved in DNA metabolism and cell-cycle checkpoint control. To help clarify the physiological roles of the ATM protein, we disrupted the ATM gene in mice through homologous recombination. Initial evaluation of the ATM knockout animals indicates that inactivation of the mouse ATM gene recreates much of the phenotype of ataxia-telangiectasia. The homozygous mutant (ATM-/-) mice are viable, growth-retarded, and infertile. The infertility of ATM-/- mice results from meiotic failure. Meiosis is arrested at the zygotene/pachytene stage of prophase I as a result of abnormal chromosomal synapsis and subsequent chromosome fragmentation. Immune defects also are evident in ATM-/- mice, including reduced numbers of B220 + CD43- pre-B cells, thymocytes, and peripheral T cells, as well as functional impairment of T-cell-dependent immune responses. The cerebella of ATM-/- mice appear normal by histologic examination at 3 to 4 months and the mice have no gross behavioral abnormalities. The majority of mutant mice rapidly develop thymic lymphomas and die before 4 months of age. These findings indicate that the ATM gene product plays an essential role in a diverse group of cellular processes, including meiosis, the normal growth of somatic tissues, immune development, and tumor suppression.. 

growth retardation
Kniest dysplasia: Dr. W. Kniest, his patient, the molecular defect.
Kniest dysplasia is a severe chondrodysplasia caused by the defective formation of type II collagen. We report about Dr. Kniest, who first described the condition in 1952, and his patient, who, at the age of 50 years is severely handicapped with short stature, restricted joint mobility, and blindness but is mentally alert and leads an active life. Molecular analysis of the patients DNA showed a single base (G) deletion involving the GT dinucleotide at the start of intron 18 destroying a splice site of the COL2A1 gene. This is in accordance with molecular findings in other patients with Kniest dysplasia and confirms, in the original patient, that the disorder is caused by small inframe deletions often due to exon skipping as a result of COL2A1 splice site mutations.. 

short stature
Heterogeneity in Schwartz-Jampel chondrodystrophic myotonia.
The Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS; chondrodystrophic myotonia; McK 255, 800) is a recessively inherited condition defined by myotonia, short stature, and bone dysplasia. Genetic linkage between SJS and chromosomal region 1q36-34 has been observed in several families, but the gene has not yet been identified. We studied the clinical and radiological features in 81 patients from the literature and 5 own patients trying to identify distinct subgroups. In addition, we tested genetic linkage to the SJS locus on chromosome 1 in one family with two affected sibs. We found that a group of patients have mild skeletal changes which may be secondary consequences of myotonia, while another group of patients appear to have primary bone dysplasia with myotonia. Within this latter group, there are differences in age of manifestation, clinical course and pattern of bone changes. We tentatively isolate three different types of SJS  type 1A, usually recognized in childhood, with moderate bone dysplasia, corresponding to the original descriptions of Schwartz, Jampel and Aberfeld; type 1B, similar to type 1A but recognizable at birth, with more pronounced bone dysplasia resembling Kniest dysplasia; and type 2, manifest at birth, with increased mortality and bone dysplasia resembling Pyle disease. Genetic analysis of the family with two sibs affected by SJS type 2 showed evidence against linkage to chromosome 1p36-34. CONCLUSIONS  SJS is clinically and radiologically heterogeneous. The causes of heterogeneity are not known yet but are likely to include both different mutations at the SJS locus on chromosome 1 and the presence of a second SJS locus. A tentative clinico-radiological classification can be useful for the characterization of patients and the development of genotype-phenotype correlations.. 

short stature