Identification of WASP mutations, mutation hotspots and genotype-phenotype disparities in 24 patients with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), an X-linked immunodeficiency disease caused by mutation in the recently isolated gene encoding WAS protein (WASP), is known to be associated with extensive clinical heterogeneity. Cumulative mutation data have revealed that WASP genotypes are also highly variable among WAS patients, but the relationship of phenotype with genotype in this disease remains unclear. To address this issue we characterized WASP mutations in 24 unrelated WAS patients, including 18 boys with severe classical WAS and 6 boys expressing mild forms of the disease, and then examined the degree of correlation of these as well as all previously published WASP mutations with disease severity. By analysis of these compiled mutation data, we demonstrated clustering of WASP mutations within the four most N-terminal exons of the gene and also identified several sites within this region as hotspots for WASP mutation. These characteristics were observed, however, in both severe and mild cases of the disease. Similarly, while the cumulative data revealed a predominance of missense mutations among the WASP gene lesions observed in boys with isolated thrombocytopenia, missense mutations were not exclusively associated with milder WAS phenotypes, but also comprised a substantial portion (38%) of the WASP gene defects found in patients with severe disease. These findings, as well as the detection of identical WASP mutations in patients with disparate phenotypes, reveal a lack of phenotype concordance with genotype in WAS and thus imply that phenotypic outcome in this disease cannot be reliably predicted solely on the basis of WASP genotypes.. 

X-linked immunodeficiency disease
The human complement C9 gene: identification of two mutations causing deficiency and revision of the gene structure.
The ninth component of human complement (C9) is the last of the terminal complement components creating the membrane attack complex. C9 is a single-chain serum protein that is encoded by a gene located on chromosome 5p. Deficiency of terminal complement components is generally associated with recurrent neisseria infections. We studied a previously described Swiss family with inherited C9 deficiency. To identify the genetic basis of C9 deficiency, we developed an approach using exon-specific PCR and direct DNA sequencing. As a cause of C9 deficiency , we found two different point mutations, both generating TGA stop codons in the coding sequence. One mutation, a C to A exchange, was detected in exon 2 at cDNA position 166, the other, a C to T exchange, was located in exon 4 (cDNA position 464). In family studies of three first-degree relatives with heterozygous C9 deficiency, we demonstrated that the two mutations are segregating independently. Therefore, these mutations are sufficient to explain the complete deficiency of both the probands studied. DNA sequencing of the exon-intron junctions revealed a number of revisions regarding the boundaries between exons 4, 5, and 6 as well as between exons 10 and 11. No additional introns were detected in exons 6 and 10. Furthermore, DNA marker studies were conducted using known polymorphisms of the C6, C7, and C9 genes, confirming the linkage of the observed C9 mutations with defined haplotypes.. 

Deficiency of terminal complement components
Genetic bases of human complement C7 deficiency.
Complement C7 deficiency (C7D) is associated frequently with recurrent bacterial infections, especially meningitis caused by Neisseria meningitidis. We report in this work the molecular bases of C7D in two unrelated Japanese males. We used exon-specific PCR/single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis as a screening step for mutations. Subsequent direct sequencing of the target exons identified homozygous mutations in exon 16 of case 1 and in exon 15 of case 2. The mutation of case 1 was a homozygous T to A transversion at nucleotide 2250, the third nucleotide of the codon TGT for Cys728, leading to a stop codon TGA (C728X). In case 2, a homozygous 2-bp deletion (2137delTG/2138delGT/2139delTG) caused a frameshift, generating a premature termination codon 4 to 6 nucleotides downstream. Family study in case 1 confirmed the genetic nature of the defect. Moreover, we detected a novel polymorphism in intron 11 that presumably is linked to the mutation responsible for C7D in case 1. Our results indicate that the pathogenesis of C7D is heterogeneous like most of the other deficiencies of complement components.. 

deficiencies of complement components
Ataxia-telangiectasia: founder effect among north African Jews.
The ATM gene is responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency and cancer predisposition. A-T carriers were reported to be moderately cancer-prone. A wide variety of A-T mutations, most of which are unique to single families, were identified in various ethnic groups, precluding carrier screening with mutation-specific assays. However, a single mutation was observed in 32/33 defective ATM alleles in Jewish A-T families of North African origin, coming from various regions of Morocco and Tunisia. This mutation, 103C-- > T, results in a stop codon at position 35 of the ATM protein. In keeping with the nature of this mutation, various antibodies directed against the ATM protein failed to defect this protein in patient cells. A rapid carrier detection assay detected this mutation in three out of 488 ATM alleles of Jewish Moroccan or Tunisian origin. This founder effect provides a unique opportunity for population-based screening for A-T carriers in a large Jewish community.. 

immunodeficiency