The mouse homolog of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) gene is highly conserved and maps near the scurfy (sf) mutation on the X chromosome.
The mouse WASP gene, the homolog of the gene mutated in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, has been isolated and sequenced. the predicted amino acid sequence is 86% identical to the human WASP sequence. A distinct feature of the mouse gene is an expanded polymorphic GGA trinucleotide repeat that codes for polyglycine and varies from 15 to 17 triplets in different Mus musculus strains. The genomic structure of the mouse WASP gene is expressed as an approximately 2. 4-kb mRNA in thymus and spleen. Chromosomal mapping in an interspecific M. Musculus/M. spretus backcross placed the Wasp locus near the centromere of the mouse X chromosome, inseparable from Gata1, Tcfe3, and scurfy (sf). This localization makes Wasp a candidate for involvement in scurfy, a T cell-mediated fatal lymphoreticular disease of mice that has previously been proposed as a mouse homolog of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Northern analysis of sf tissue samples indicated the presence of WASP mRNA in liver and skin, presumably as a consequence of lymphocytic infiltration, but non abnormalities in the amount or size of mRNA present. 

fatal lymphoreticular disease
Missense mutations in the Fas gene resulting in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: a molecular and immunological analysis.
Programmed cell death (or apoptosis) is a physiological process essential to the normal development and homeostatic maintenance of the immune system. The Fas/Apo-1 receptor plays a crucial role in the regulation of apoptosis, as demonstrated by lymphoproliferation in MRL-lpr/lpr mice and by the recently described autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) in humans, both of which are due to mutations in the Fas gene. We describe a novel family with ALPS in which three affected siblings carry two distinct missense mutations on both the Fas gene alleles and show lack of Fas-induced apoptosis. The children share common clinical features including splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy, but only one developed severe autoimmune manifestations. In all three siblings, we demonstrated the presence of anergic CD3 + CD4-CD8- (double negative, [DN]) T cells; moreover, a chronic lymphocyte activation was found, as demonstrated by the presence of high levels of HLA-DR expression on peripheral CD3 + cells and by the presence of high levels of serum activation markers such as soluble interleukin-2 receptor (slL-2R) and soluble CD30 (sCD30).. 

lymphadenopathy