Mice lacking the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase develop a late onset progressive myopathy.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from the expansion of a CTG repeat in the 3 untranslated region of a putative protein kinase (DMPK). To elucidate the role of DMPK in DM pathogenesis we have developed Dmpk deficient (Dmpk-/-) mice. Dmpk-/-mice develop a late-onset, progressive skeletal myopathy that shares some pathological features with DM. Muscles from mature mice show variation in fibre size, increased fibre degeneration and fibrosis. Adult Dmpk-/-mice show ultrastructural changes in muscle and a 50% decrease in force generation compared to young mice. Our results indicate that DMPK may be necessary for the maintenance of skeletal muscle structure and function and suggest that a decrease in DMPK levels may contribute to DM pathology.. 

myopathy
progressive skeletal myopathy
Abnormal myotonic dystrophy protein kinase levels produce only mild myopathy in mice.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is commonly associated with CTG repeat expansions within the gene for DM-protein kinase (DMPK). The effect of altered expression levels of DMPK, which is ubiquitously expressed in all muscle cell lineages during development, was examined by disrupting the endogenous Dmpk gene and overexpressing a normal human DMPK transgene in mice. Nullizygous (-/-) mice showed only inconsistent and minor size changes in head and neck muscle fibres at older age, animals with the highest DMPK transgene expression showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and enhanced neonatal mortality. However, both models lack other frequent DM symptoms including the fibre-type dependent atrophy, myotonia, cataract and male-infertility. These results strengthen the contention that simple loss- or gain-of-expression of DMPK is not the only crucial requirement for development of the disease.. 

myopathy
A mutation in autosomal dominant myotonia congenita affects pore properties of the muscle chloride channel.
Autosomal dominant myotonia congenita is an inherited disorder of skeletal muscle caused by mutations in a voltage-gated Cl- channel gene (CLCN1, 7q35). Here, we report that a mutation predicting the substitution of Gly 230 by glutamic acid (G230E) between segments D3 and D4 dramatically alters the pore properties of a recombinant human muscle Cl- channel (hCIC-1) expressed in a mammalian cell line (tsA201). The G230E mutation causes substantial changes in anion and cation selectivity as well as a fundamental change in rectification of the current-voltage relationship. Whereas wild-type channels are characterized by pronounced inward rectification and a Cl > thiocyanate > Br > NO (3) > I > CH (3) SO (3) selectivity, G230E exhibits outward rectification at positive potentials and a thiocyanate > NO (3) > I > Br > Cl > CH (3) SO (3) selectivity. Furthermore, the cation-to-anion permeability ratio of the mutant is much greater than that of the wild-type channel. Voltage-dependent blocks by intracellular and extracellular iodide help to distinguish two distinct ion binding sites within the hClC-1 conduction pathway. Both binding sites are preserved in the mutant but have decreased affinities for iodide. These findings suggest that Gly 230 is critical for normal ion conductance in hClC-1 and that this residue resides within the channel pore.. 

inherited disorder of skeletal muscle