An intronic mutation in a lariat branchpoint sequence is a direct cause of an inherited human disorder (fish-eye disease).
The first step in the splicing of an intron from nuclear precursors of mRNA results in the formation of a lariat structure. A distinct intronic nucleotide sequence, known as the branchpoint region, plays a central role in this process. We here describe a point mutation in such a sequence. Three sisters were shown to suffer from fish-eye disease (FED), a disorder which is caused by mutations in the gene coding for lecithin  cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT). Sequencing of the LCAT gene of all three probands revealed compound heterozygosity for a missense mutation in exon 4 which is reported to underlie the FED phenotype, and a point mutation located in intron 4 (IVS4  T-22C). By performing in vitro expression of LCAT minigenes and reverse transcriptase PCR on mRNA isolated from leukocytes of the patient, this gene defect was shown to cause a null allele as the result of complete intron retention. In conclusion, we demonstrated that a point mutation in a lariat branchpoint consensus sequence causes a null allele in a patient with FED. In addition, our finding illustrates the importance of this sequence for normal human mRNA processing. Finally, this report provides a widely applicable strategy which ensures fast and effective screening for intronic defects that underlie differential gene expression.. 

inherited human disorder
Targeted disruption of ATM leads to growth retardation, chromosomal fragmentation during meiosis, immune defects, and thymic lymphoma.
ATM, the gene mutated in the inherited human disease ataxia-telangiectasia, is a member of a family of kinases involved in DNA metabolism and cell-cycle checkpoint control. To help clarify the physiological roles of the ATM protein, we disrupted the ATM gene in mice through homologous recombination. Initial evaluation of the ATM knockout animals indicates that inactivation of the mouse ATM gene recreates much of the phenotype of ataxia-telangiectasia. The homozygous mutant (ATM-/-) mice are viable, growth-retarded, and infertile. The infertility of ATM-/- mice results from meiotic failure. Meiosis is arrested at the zygotene/pachytene stage of prophase I as a result of abnormal chromosomal synapsis and subsequent chromosome fragmentation. Immune defects also are evident in ATM-/- mice, including reduced numbers of B220 + CD43- pre-B cells, thymocytes, and peripheral T cells, as well as functional impairment of T-cell-dependent immune responses. The cerebella of ATM-/- mice appear normal by histologic examination at 3 to 4 months and the mice have no gross behavioral abnormalities. The majority of mutant mice rapidly develop thymic lymphomas and die before 4 months of age. These findings indicate that the ATM gene product plays an essential role in a diverse group of cellular processes, including meiosis, the normal growth of somatic tissues, immune development, and tumor suppression.. 

inherited human disease
Heterogeneity in Schwartz-Jampel chondrodystrophic myotonia.
The Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS; chondrodystrophic myotonia; McK 255, 800) is a recessively inherited condition defined by myotonia, short stature, and bone dysplasia. Genetic linkage between SJS and chromosomal region 1q36-34 has been observed in several families, but the gene has not yet been identified. We studied the clinical and radiological features in 81 patients from the literature and 5 own patients trying to identify distinct subgroups. In addition, we tested genetic linkage to the SJS locus on chromosome 1 in one family with two affected sibs. We found that a group of patients have mild skeletal changes which may be secondary consequences of myotonia, while another group of patients appear to have primary bone dysplasia with myotonia. Within this latter group, there are differences in age of manifestation, clinical course and pattern of bone changes. We tentatively isolate three different types of SJS  type 1A, usually recognized in childhood, with moderate bone dysplasia, corresponding to the original descriptions of Schwartz, Jampel and Aberfeld; type 1B, similar to type 1A but recognizable at birth, with more pronounced bone dysplasia resembling Kniest dysplasia; and type 2, manifest at birth, with increased mortality and bone dysplasia resembling Pyle disease. Genetic analysis of the family with two sibs affected by SJS type 2 showed evidence against linkage to chromosome 1p36-34. CONCLUSIONS  SJS is clinically and radiologically heterogeneous. The causes of heterogeneity are not known yet but are likely to include both different mutations at the SJS locus on chromosome 1 and the presence of a second SJS locus. A tentative clinico-radiological classification can be useful for the characterization of patients and the development of genotype-phenotype correlations.. 

recessively inherited condition
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is a frequent cause of idiopathic Addison's disease in young adult male patients.
X-Linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a genetic disease associated with demyelination of the central nervous system, adrenal insufficiency, and accumulation of very long chain fatty acids in tissue and body fluids. ALD is due to mutation of a gene located in Xq28 that encodes a peroxisomal transporter protein of unknown function. The most common phenotype of ALD is the cerebral form (45%) that develops in boys between 5-12 yr. Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) involves the spinal cord and peripheral nerves in young adults (35%). Adrenal insufficiency (Addisons disease) is frequently associated with AMN or cerebral ALD and may remain the only clinical expression of ALD (8% of cases). The prevalence of ALD among adults with Addisons disease remains unknown. To evaluate this prevalence, we performed biochemical analysis of very long chain fatty acids in 14 male patients (age ranging from 12-45 yr at diagnosis) previously diagnosed as having primary idiopathic adrenocortical insufficiency. In 5 of 14 patients (35%), elevated plasma concentrations of very long chain fatty acids were detected. None of these patients had adrenocortical antibodies. By electrophysiological tests and magnetic resonance imaging it was determined that two patients had cerebral ALD, one had adrenomyeloneuropathy with cerebral involvement, and two had preclinical AMN. Our data support the hypothesis that ALD is a frequent cause of idiopathic Addisons disease in children and adults.. 

genetic disease
Mice lacking the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase develop a late onset progressive myopathy.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from the expansion of a CTG repeat in the 3 untranslated region of a putative protein kinase (DMPK). To elucidate the role of DMPK in DM pathogenesis we have developed Dmpk deficient (Dmpk-/-) mice. Dmpk-/-mice develop a late-onset, progressive skeletal myopathy that shares some pathological features with DM. Muscles from mature mice show variation in fibre size, increased fibre degeneration and fibrosis. Adult Dmpk-/-mice show ultrastructural changes in muscle and a 50% decrease in force generation compared to young mice. Our results indicate that DMPK may be necessary for the maintenance of skeletal muscle structure and function and suggest that a decrease in DMPK levels may contribute to DM pathology.. 

autosomal dominant disorder
Gene therapy for phenylketonuria.
Classical phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Limitations of the current dietary treatment for PKU have led to the development of potential treatments based on somatic gene transfer. Three different vector systems have been examined. Vectors derived from a recombinant retrovirus or a DNA/protein complex can efficiently transduce the PAH cDNA into PAH-deficient hepatocytes in vitro, but the application of these vector systems is presently limited by their low transduction efficiency in vivo. In contrast, a vector derived from a recombinant adenovirus can restore 10% -80% of normal hepatic PAH activity into PAH-deficient mice, which completely normalizes serum phenylalanine levels. This treatment is transient and cannot be effectively re-administered due to the presence of neutralizing antibodies directed against the recombinant adenoviral vector. However, these findings suggest that PKU can be completely corrected by somatic gene therapy, and provide some direction for the future development of adenoviral vectors.. 

autosomal recessive disorder
Autosomal dominant primary hyperparathyroidism and jaw tumor syndrome associated with renal hamartomas and cystic kidney disease: linkage to 1q21-q32 and loss of the wild type allele in renal hamartomas.
Hereditary hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome (HPT-JT) is an autosomal dominant disease (OMIM 145001) that has recently been mapped to chromosomal region 1q21-q32 (HRPT2). Here we report two families with HPT-JT syndrome in which adult renal hamartomas or cystic kidney disease were prominent associated features, possibly representing a new phenotypic variant of the HPT-JT syndrome. In the first family, renal lesions were present in five out of six affected individuals, whereas HPT and JT were seen in four and two cases, respectively. In the second family, JT was found in three of the five affected individuals and two affected members also exhibited polycystic kidney disease. The possibility of the latter cosegregating as a separate autosomal dominant gene can not be ruled out. A sex-dependent penetrance of primary HPT, resulting in predominantly male-affected cases was evident in the two families. Twenty microsatellite markers in the HRPT2 region were typed, in addition to markers in the multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types 1 and 2 regions at 11q13 and 10q11. The disease in these two kindreds was linked to five markers in the 1q21-q32 region (logarithm-of-odds scores  3. 2-4 2-4. 2), whereas linkage to the MEN1 and MEN2 regions was excluded. Meiotic recombinations detected in affected individuals placed the locus telomeric of D1S215, thus narrowing the HRPT2 region from > 60 to approximately 34 centimorgans. Loss of heterozygosity was studied in seven renal hamartomas from two affected individuals in the first family, as well as in a jaw tumor and a parathyroid tumor from the second family. All renal hamartomas showed loss of heterozygosity at the 1q21-q32 region. The losses invariably involved the wild type allele derived from the unaffected parent, suggesting the inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene in this region 

autosomal dominant disease
Trinucleotide repeat expansion at the myotonic dystrophy locus reduces expression of DMAHP.
Myotonic dystrophy, or dystrophia myotonica (DM), is an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder caused by the expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in the 3 untranslated region of the DMPK protein kinase gene on chromosome 19q13. 3 (refs 1-3). Although the DM mutation was identified more than five years ago, the pathogenic mechanisms underlying this most prevalent form of hereditary adult neuromuscular disease remain elusive. Previous work from our laboratory demonstrated that a DNase l-hypersensitive site located adjacent to the repeats on the wild-type allele is eliminated by repeat expansion, indicating that large CTG-repeat arrays may be associated with a local chromatin environment that represses gene expression. Here we report that the hypersensitive site contains an enhancer element that regulates transcription of the adjacent DMAHP homeobox gene. Analysis of DMAHP expression in the cells of DM patients with loss of the hypersensitive site revealed a two- to fourfold reduction in steady-state DMAHP transcript levels relative to wild-type controls. Allele-specific analysis of DMAHP expression showed that steady-state transcript levels from the expanded allele were greatly reduced in comparison to those from the wild-type allele. Together, these results demonstrate that CTG-repeat expansions can suppress local gene expression and implicate DMAHP in DM pathogenesis. 

autosomal dominant multisystem disorder
A mutation in autosomal dominant myotonia congenita affects pore properties of the muscle chloride channel.
Autosomal dominant myotonia congenita is an inherited disorder of skeletal muscle caused by mutations in a voltage-gated Cl- channel gene (CLCN1, 7q35). Here, we report that a mutation predicting the substitution of Gly 230 by glutamic acid (G230E) between segments D3 and D4 dramatically alters the pore properties of a recombinant human muscle Cl- channel (hCIC-1) expressed in a mammalian cell line (tsA201). The G230E mutation causes substantial changes in anion and cation selectivity as well as a fundamental change in rectification of the current-voltage relationship. Whereas wild-type channels are characterized by pronounced inward rectification and a Cl > thiocyanate > Br > NO (3) > I > CH (3) SO (3) selectivity, G230E exhibits outward rectification at positive potentials and a thiocyanate > NO (3) > I > Br > Cl > CH (3) SO (3) selectivity. Furthermore, the cation-to-anion permeability ratio of the mutant is much greater than that of the wild-type channel. Voltage-dependent blocks by intracellular and extracellular iodide help to distinguish two distinct ion binding sites within the hClC-1 conduction pathway. Both binding sites are preserved in the mutant but have decreased affinities for iodide. These findings suggest that Gly 230 is critical for normal ion conductance in hClC-1 and that this residue resides within the channel pore.. 

inherited disorder of skeletal muscle
Isolation of full-length ATM cDNA and correction of the ataxia-telangiectasia cellular phenotype.
A gene mutated in the human genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), ATM, was recently identified by positional cloning. ATM is a member of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase superfamily, some of which are protein kinases and appear to have important roles in cell cycle control and radiation signal transduction. We describe herein, to our knowledge, for the first time, the cloning of a full-length cDNA for ATM and correction of multiple aspects of the radio-sensitive phenotype of A-T cells by transfection with this cDNA. Overexpression of ATM cDNA in A-T cells enhanced the survival of these cells in response to radiation exposure, decreased radiation-induced chromosome aberrations, reduced radio-resistant DNA synthesis, and partially corrected defective cell cycle checkpoints and induction of stress-activated protein kinase. This correction of the defects in A-T cells provides further evidence of the multiplicity of effector functions of the ATM protein and suggests possible approaches to gene therapy.. 

genetic disorder
Ataxia-telangiectasia: founder effect among north African Jews.
The ATM gene is responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency and cancer predisposition. A-T carriers were reported to be moderately cancer-prone. A wide variety of A-T mutations, most of which are unique to single families, were identified in various ethnic groups, precluding carrier screening with mutation-specific assays. However, a single mutation was observed in 32/33 defective ATM alleles in Jewish A-T families of North African origin, coming from various regions of Morocco and Tunisia. This mutation, 103C-- > T, results in a stop codon at position 35 of the ATM protein. In keeping with the nature of this mutation, various antibodies directed against the ATM protein failed to defect this protein in patient cells. A rapid carrier detection assay detected this mutation in three out of 488 ATM alleles of Jewish Moroccan or Tunisian origin. This founder effect provides a unique opportunity for population-based screening for A-T carriers in a large Jewish community.. 

autosomal recessive disorder