Two frequent missense mutations in Pendred syndrome.
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by early childhood deafness and goiter. A century after its recognition as a syndrome by Vaughan Pendred, the disease gene (PDS) was mapped to chromosome 7q22-q31. 1 and, recently, found to encode a putative sulfate transporter. We performed mutation analysis of the PDS gene in patients from 14 Pendred families originating from seven countries and identified all mutations. The mutations include three single base deletions, one splice site mutation and 10 missense mutations. One missense mutation (L236P) was found in a homozygous state in two consanguineous families and in a heterozygous state in five additional non-consanguineous families. Another missense mutation (T416P) was found in a homozygous state in one family and in a heterozygous state in four families. Pendred patients in three non-consanguineous families were shown to be compound heterozygotes for L236P and T416P. In total, one or both of these mutations were found in nine of the 14 families analyzed. The identification of two frequent PDS mutations will facilitate the molecular diagnosis of Pendred syndrome. 

Pendred syndrome
Genomic structure of the human congenital chloride diarrhea (CLD) gene.
Congenital chloride diarrhea (CLD) is caused by mutations in a gene which encodes an intestinal anion transporter. We report here the complete genomic organization of the human CLD gene which spans approximately 39kb, and comprises 21 exons. All exon/intron boundaries conform to the GT/AG rule. An analysis of the putative promoter region sequence shows a putative TATA box and predicts multiple transcription factor binding sites. The genomic structure was determined using DNA from several sources including multiple large-insert libaries and genomic DNA from Finnish CLD patients and controls. Exon-specific primers developed in this study will facilitate mutation screening studies of patients with the disease. Genomic sequencing of a BAC clone H_RG364P16 revealed the presence of another, highly homologous gene 3 of the CLD gene, with a similar genomic structure, recently identified as the Pendred syndrome gene (PDS).. 
