Ataxia-telangiectasia: identification and detection of founder-effect mutations in the ATM gene in ethnic populations.
To facilitate the evaluation of ATM heterozygotes for susceptibility to other diseases, such as breast cancer, we have attempted to define the most common mutations and their frequencies in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) homozygotes from 10 ethnic populations. Both genomic mutations and their effects on cDNA were characterized. Protein-truncation testing of the entire ATM cDNA detected 92 (66%) truncating mutations in 140 mutant alleles screened. The haplotyping of patients with identical mutations indicates that almost all of these represent common ancestry and that very few spontaneously recurring ATM mutations exist. Assays requiring minimal amounts of genomic DNA were designed to allow rapid screening for common ethnic mutations. These rapid assays detected mutations in 76% of Costa Rican patients (3), 50% of Norwegian patients (1), 25% of Polish patients (4), and 14% of Italian patients (1), as well as in patients of Amish/Mennonite and Irish English backgrounds. Additional mutations were observed in Japanese, Utah Mormon, and African American patients. These assays should facilitate screening for A-T heterozygotes in the populations studied.. 

Ataxia-telangiectasia
ATM mutations and phenotypes in ataxia-telangiectasia families in the British Isles: expression of mutant ATM and the risk of leukemia, lymphoma, and breast cancer.
We report the spectrum of 59 ATM mutations observed in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients in the British Isles. Of 51 ATM mutations identified in families native to the British Isles, 11 were founder mutations, and 2 of these 11 conferred a milder clinical phenotype with respect to both cerebellar degeneration and cellular features. We report, in two A-T families, an ATM mutation (7271T-- > G) that may be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in both homozygotes and heterozygotes (relative risk 12. 7; P =. 0025), although there is a less severe A-T phenotype in terms of the degree of cerebellar degeneration. This mutation (7271T-- > G) also allows expression of full-length ATM protein at a level comparable with that in unaffected individuals. In addition, we have studied 18 A-T patients, in 15 families, who developed leukemia, lymphoma, preleukemic T-cell proliferation, or Hodgkin lymphoma, mostly in childhood. A wide variety of ATM mutation types, including missense mutations and in-frame deletions, were seen in these patients. We also show that 25% of all A-T patients carried in-frame deletions or missense mutations, many of which were also associated with expression of mutant ATM protein. 

Clustering of missense mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia gene in a sporadic T-cell leukaemia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene at 11q22-q23 (ref. 3). The risk of cancer, especially lymphoid neoplasias, is substantially elevated in A-T patients and has long been associated with chromosomal instability. By analysing tumour DNA from patients with sporadic T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL), a rare clonal malignancy with similarities to a mature T-cell leukaemia seen in A-T, we demonstrate a high frequency of ATM mutations in T-PLL. In marked contrast to the ATM mutation pattern in A-T, the most frequent nucleotide changes in this leukaemia were missense mutations. These clustered in the region corresponding to the kinase domain, which is highly conserved in ATM-related proteins in mouse, yeast and Drosophila. The resulting amino-acid substitutions are predicted to interfere with ATP binding or substrate recognition. Two of seventeen mutated T-PLL samples had a previously reported A-T allele. In contrast, no mutations were detected in the p53 gene, suggesting that this tumour suppressor is not frequently altered in this leukaemia. Occasional missense mutations in ATM were also found in tumour DNA from patients with B-cell non-Hodgkins lymphomas (B-NHL) and a B-NHL cell line. The evidence of a significant proportion of loss-of-function mutations and a complete absence of the normal copy of ATM in the majority of mutated tumours establishes somatic inactivation of this gene in the pathogenesis of sporadic T-PLL and suggests that ATM acts as a tumour suppressor. As constitutional DNA was not available, a putative hereditary predisposition to T-PLL will require further investigation.. 

ATM germline mutations in classical ataxia-telangiectasia patients in the Dutch population.
Germline mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). In our study, we have determined the ATM mutation spectrum in 19 classical A-T patients, including some immigrant populations, as well as 12 of Dutch ethnic origin. Both the protein truncation test (PTT) and the restriction endonuclease fingerprinting (REF) method were used and compared for their detection efficiency, identifying 76% and 60% of the mutations, respectively. Most patients were found to be compound heterozygote. Seventeen mutations were distinct, of which 10 were not reported previously. Mutations are small deletions or point mutations frequently affecting splice sites. Moreover, a 16. 7-kb genomic deletion of the 3 end of the gene, most likely a result of recombination between two LINE elements, was identified. The most frequently found mutation, identified in three unrelated Turkish A-T individuals, was previously described to be a Turkish A-T founder mutation. The presence of a founder mutation among relatively small ethnic population groups in Western Europe could indicate a high carrier frequency in such communities. In patients of Dutch ethnic origin, however, no significant founder effect could be identified. The observed genetic heterogeneity including the relative high percentage of splice-site mutations had no reflection on the phenotype. All patients manifested classical A-T and increased cellular radioresistant DNA synthesis. 

Mutations of the ATM gene detected in Japanese ataxia-telangiectasia patients: possible preponderance of the two founder mutations 4612del165 and 7883del5.
The ATM (A-T, mutated) gene on human chromosome 11q22. 3 has recently been identified as the gene responsible for the human recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). In order to define the types of disease-causing ATM mutations in Japanese A-T patients as well as to look for possible mutational hotspots, reverse-transcribed RNA derived from ten patients belonging to eight unrelated Japanese A-T families was analyzed for mutations by the restriction endonuclease fingerprinting method. As has been reported by others, mutations that lead to exon skipping or premature protein truncation were also predominant in our mutants. Six different mutations were identified on 12 of the 16 alleles examined. Four were deletions involving a loss of a single exon  exon 7, exon 16, exon 33 or exon 35. The others were minute deletions, 4649delA in exon 33 and 7883del5 in exon 55. The mutations 4612del165 and 7883del5 were found in more than two unrelated families; 44% (7 of 16) of the mutant alleles had one of the two mutations. The 4612del165 mutations in three different families were all ascribed to the same T-- > A substitution at the splice donor site in intron 33. Microsatellite genotyping around the ATM locus also indicated that a common haplotype was shared by the mutant alleles in both mutations. This suggests that these two founder mutations may be predominant among Japanese ATM mutant alleles. 

Detection of heterozygous carriers of the ataxia-telangiectasia (ATM) gene by G2 phase chromosomal radiosensitivity of peripheral blood lymphocytes.
In ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients, mutations in a single gene, ATM, result in an autosomal recessive syndrome that embraces a variety of clinical features and manifests extreme radiosensitivity and a strong pre-disposition to malignancy. Heterozygotes for the ATM gene have no clinical expression of A-T but may be cancer prone with a moderate increase in in vitro radiosensitivity. We performed a blind chromosomal analysis on G2-phase lymphocytes from 7 unrelated A-T patients, 13 obligate A-T heterozygotes (parents of the patients), and 14 normal controls following X-irradiation with 1 Gy in order to evaluate this cytogenetic method as a tool for detection of ATM carriers. Both A-T homozygotes and heterozygotes showed significantly increased levels of radiation-induced chromatid damage relative to that of normal controls. These results show that the G2-phase chromosomal radiosensitivity assay can be used for the detection of A-T heterozygotes. In combination with molecular genetic analyses, this test may be of value in studies of familial and sporadic cancers aimed at determination of the potential involvement of ATM mutations in tumor risk or development.. 
