Reversal of severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and excellent neuropsychologic outcome in very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency.
Very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is a disorder of fatty acid beta oxidation that reportedly has high rates of morbidity and mortality. We describe the outcome of a 5-year-old girl with VLCAD deficiency who was first seen at 5 months of age with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hepatomegaly, encephalopathy, and hypotonia. Biochemical studies indicated VLCAD deficiency caused by a stable yet inactive enzyme. Molecular genetic analysis of her VLCAD gene revealed a T1372C (F458L) missense mutation and a 1668 ACAG 1669 splice site mutation. After initial treatment with intravenous glucose and carnitine, the patient has thrived on a low-fat diet supplemented with medium-chain triglyceride oil and carnitine and avoidance of fasting. Her ventricular hypertrophy resolved significantly over 1 year, and cognitively, she is in the superior range for age. Clinical recognition of VLCAD deficiency is important because it is one of the few directly treatable causes of cardiomyopathy in children.. 

encephalopathy
Are Dp71 and Dp140 brain dystrophin isoforms related to cognitive impairment in Duchenne muscular dystrophy?
Molecular study and neuropsychological analysis were performed concurrently on 49 patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) in order to find a molecular explanation for the cognitive impairment observed in most DMD patients. Complete analysis of the dystrophin gene was performed to define the localization of deletions and duplications in relation to the different DMD promoters. Qualitative analysis of the Dp71 transcript and testing for the specific first exon of Dp140 were also carried out. Neuropsychological analysis assessed verbal and visuospatial intelligence, verbal memory, and reading skills. Comparison of molecular and psychometric findings demonstrated that deletions and duplications that were localized in the distal part of the gene seemed to be preferentially associated with cognitive impairment. Two altered Dp71 transcripts and two deleted Dp140 DNA sequences were found in four patients with severe cerebral dysfunction. These findings suggest that some sequences located in the distal part of the gene and, in particular, some DMD isoforms expressed in the brain may be related to the cognitive impairment associated with DMD.. 
