Down-regulation of transmembrane carbonic anhydrases in renal cell carcinoma cell lines by wild-type von Hippel-Lindau transgenes.
To discover genes involved in von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) -mediated carcinogenesis, we used renal cell carcinoma cell lines stably transfected with wild-type VHL-expressing transgenes. Large-scale RNA differential display technology applied to these cell lines identified several differentially expressed genes, including an alpha carbonic anhydrase gene, termed CA12. The deduced protein sequence was classified as a one-pass transmembrane CA possessing an apparently intact catalytic domain in the extracellular CA module. Reintroduced wild-type VHL strongly inhibited the overexpression of the CA12 gene in the parental renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Similar results were obtained with CA9, encoding another transmembrane CA with an intact catalytic domain. Although both domains of the VHL protein contribute to regulation of CA12 expression, the elongin binding domain alone could effectively regulate CA9 expression. We mapped CA12 and CA9 loci to chromosome bands 15q22 and 17q21. 2 respectively, regions prone to amplification in some human cancers. Additional experiments are needed to define the role of CA IX and CA XII enzymes in the regulation of pH in the extracellular microenvironment and its potential impact on cancer cell growth. 

renal cell carcinoma
The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene is required for cell cycle exit upon serum withdrawal.
The inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene predisposes affected individuals to the human VHL cancer syndrome and is associated with sporadic renal cell carcinomas (RCC) and brain hemangioblastomas. VHL-negative 786-0 RCC cells are tumorigenic in nude mice which is suppressed by the reintroduction of VHL. Remarkably, this occurs without affecting the growth rate and cell cycle profile of these cells in culture. The 786-0 cell line, like many cancer cells, fails to exit the cell cycle upon serum withdrawal. Here, it is shown that reintroduction of the wild-type VHL gene restores the ability of VHL-negative RCC cancer cells to exit the cell cycle and enter G0/quiescence in low serum. Both VHL-positive and VHL-negative RCC cells exit the cell cycle by contact inhibition. The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p27, accumulates upon serum withdrawal, only in the presence of VHL, as a result of the stabilization of the protein. We propose that the loss of wild-type VHL gene results in a specific cellular defect in serum-dependent growth control, which may initiate tumor formation. This is corrected by the reintroduction of wild-type VHL, implicating VHL as the first tumor suppressor involved in the regulation of cell cycle exit, which is consistent with its gatekeeper function in the kidney.. 
