Diagnosis of hemochromatosis.
If untreated, hemochromatosis can cause serious illness and early death, but the disease is still substantially under-diagnosed. The cornerstone of screening and case detection is the measurement of serum transferrin saturation and the serum ferritin level. Once the diagnosis is suspected, physicians must use serum ferritin levels and hepatic iron stores on liver biopsy specimens to assess patients for the presence of iron overload. Liver biopsy is also used to establish the presence or absence of cirrhosis, which can affect prognosis and management. A DNA-based test for the HFE gene is commercially available, but its place in the diagnosis of hemochromatosis is still being evaluated. Currently, the most useful role for this test is in the detection of hemochromatosis in the family members of patients with a proven case of the disease. It is crucial to diagnose hemochromatosis before hepatic cirrhosis develops because phlebotomy therapy can avert serious chronic disease and can even lead to normal life expectancy.. 

early death
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome type 2 and Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome: a case for "lumping".
Recent studies demonstrated the existence of a genetically distinct, usually lethal form of the Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS) of myotonia and skeletal dysplasia, which we called SJS type 2. This disorder is reminiscent of another rare condition, the Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome (SWS), which comprises campomelia at birth with skeletal dysplasia, contractures, and early death. To test for possible nosologic identity between these disorders, we reviewed the literature and obtained a follow-up of the only two surviving patients, one with SJS type 2 at age 10 years and another with SWS at age 7 years. Patients reported as having either neonatal SJS or SWS presented a combination of a severe, prenatal-onset neuromuscular disorder (with congenital joint contractures, respiratory and feeding difficulties, tendency to hyperthermia, and frequent death in infancy) with a distinct campomelic-metaphyseal skeletal dysplasia. The similarity of the clinical and radiographic findings is so extensive that these disorders appear to be a single entity. The follow-up observation of an identical and unique pattern of progressive bone dysplasia in the two patients (one with SJS type 2, one with SWS) surviving beyond infancy adds to the evidence in favor of identity. The hypothesis that SWS and SJS type 2 are the same disorder should be testable by molecular methods.. 

The hemochromatosis 845 G-->A and 187 C-->G mutations: prevalence in non-Caucasian populations.
Hemochromatosis, the inherited disorder of iron metabolism, leads, if untreated, to progressive iron overload and premature death. The hemochromatosis gene, HFE, recently has been identified, and characterization of this gene has shown that it contains two mutations that result in amino acid substitutions-cDNA nucleotides 845 G-- > A (C282Y) and 187 C-- > G (H63D). Although hemochromatosis is common in Caucasians, affecting > = 1/300 individuals of northern European origin, it has not been recognized in other populations. The present study used PCR and restriction-enzyme digestion to analyze the frequency of the 845 G-- > A and 187 C-- > G mutations in HLA-typed samples from non-Caucasian populations, comprising Australian Aboriginal, Chinese, and Pacific Islanders. Results showed that the 845 G-- > A mutation was present in these populations (allele frequency 0. 32%), and, furthermore, it was always seen in conjunction with HLA haplotypes common in Caucasians, suggesting that 845 G-- > A may have been introduced into these populations by Caucasian admixture. 187 C-- > G was present at an allele frequency of 2. 68% in the two populations analyzed (Australian Aboriginal and Chinese). In the Australian Aboriginal samples, 187 C-- > G was found to be associated with HLA haplotypes common in Caucasians, suggesting that it was introduced by recent admixture. In the Chinese samples analyzed, 187 C-- > G was present in association with a wide variety of HLA haplotypes, showing this mutation to be widespread and likely to predate the more genetically restricted 845 G-- > A mutation.
