Missense mutations in the most ancient residues of the PAX6 paired domain underlie a spectrum of human congenital eye malformations.
Mutations of the human PAX6 gene underlie aniridia (congenital absence of the iris), a rare dominant malformation of the eye. The spectrum of PAX6 mutations in aniridia patients is highly biased, with 92% of all reported mutations leading to premature truncation of the protein (nonsense, splicing, insertions and deletions) and just 2% leading to substitution of one amino acid by another (missense). The extraordinary conservation of the PAX6 protein at the amino acid level amongst vertebrates predicts that pathological missense mutations should in fact be common even though they are hardly ever seen in aniridia patients. This indicates that there is a heavy ascertainment bias in the selection of patients for PAX6 mutation analysis and that the missing PAX6 missense mutations frequently may underlie phenotypes distinct from textbook aniridia. Here we present four novel PAX6 missense mutations, two in association with atypical phenotypes  ectopia pupillae (displaced pupils) and congenital nystagmus (searching gaze), and two in association with more recognizable aniridia phenotypes. Strikingly, all four mutations are located within the PAX6 paired domain and affect amino acids which are highly conserved in all known paired domain proteins. Our results support the hypothesis that the under-representation of missense mutations is caused by ascertainment bias and suggest that a substantial burden of PAX6 -related disease remains to be uncovered.. 

congenital eye malformations
Eye movement abnormalities correlate with genotype in autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type I.
We compared horizontal eye movements (visually guided saccades, antisaccades, and smooth pursuit) in control subjects (n = 14) and patients with three forms of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias type I spinocerebellar ataxias 1 and 2 (SCA1, n = 11; SCA2, n = 10) and SCA3/Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) (n = 16). In SCA1, saccade amplitude was significantly increased, resulting in hypermetria. The smooth pursuit gain was decreased. In SCA2, saccade velocity was markedly decreased. The percentage of errors in antisaccades was greatly increased and was significantly correlated with age at disease onset. In addition, a correlation between smooth pursuit gain and the number of trinucleotide repeats was found. In SCA3, gaze-evoked nystagmus was often present as was saccade hypometria and smooth pursuit gain was markedly decreased. Three major criteria, saccade amplitude, saccade velocity, and presence of gaze-evoked nystagmus, permitted the correct assignment of 90% of the SCA1, 90% of the SCA2, and 93% of the patients with SCA3 to their genetically confirmed patient group and, therefore, may help orient diagnoses of SCA1, SCA2, and SCA3 at early clinical stages of the diseases.. 
