Sperm DNA analysis in a Friedreich ataxia premutation carrier suggests both meiotic and mitotic expansion in the FRDA gene.
Friedreich ataxia is usually caused by an expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat in intron 1 of the FRDA gene. Occasionally, a fully expanded allele has been found to arise from a premutation of 100 or less triplet repeats. We have examined the sperm DNA of a premutation carrier. This mans leucocyte DNA showed one normal allele and one allele of approximately 100 repeats. His sperm showed an expanded allele in a tight range centering on a size of approximately 320 trinucleotide repeats. His affected son has repeat sizes of 1040 and 540. These data suggest that expansion occurs in two stages, the first during meiosis followed by a second mitotic expansion. We also show that in all informative carrier father to affected child transmissions, with the notable exception of the premutation carrier, the expansion size decreases.. 

Friedreich ataxia
Further evidence for a major ancient mutation underlying myotonic dystrophy from linkage disequilibrium studies in the Japanese population.
The myotonic dystrophy (DM) mutation is an unstable (CTG) n repeat, present at a copy number of 5-37 repeats on normal chromosomes but amplified to 50-3000 copies on DM chromosomes. Previous findings in Caucasian populations of a DM founder chromosome raise a question about the molecular events involved in the expansion mutation. To investigate whether a founder chromosome for the DM mutation exists in the Japanese population, we genotyped families using polymorphic markers near the (CTG) n repeat region and constructed haplotypes. Six different haplotypes were found and DM alleles were always haplotype A. To find an origin of the (CTG) n repeat mutation and to investigate the mechanism of the expansion mutation in the Japanese population we have studied 90 Japanese DM families comprising 190 affected and 130 unaffected members. The results suggest that a few common ancestral mutations in both Caucasian and Japanese populations have originated by expansion of an ancestral n = 5 repeat to n = 19-37 copies. These data support multistep models of triplet repeat expansion that have been proposed for both DM and Friedreichs ataxia.. 
