Crystal structure of the hemochromatosis protein HFE and characterization of its interaction with transferrin receptor.
HFE is an MHC-related protein that is mutated in the iron-overload disease hereditary hemochromatosis. HFE binds to transferrin receptor (TfR) and reduces its affinity for iron-loaded transferrin, implicating HFE in iron metabolism. The 2. 6 A crystal structure of HFE reveals the locations of hemochromatosis mutations and a patch of histidines that could be involved in pH-dependent interactions. We also demonstrate that soluble TfR and HFE bind tightly at the basic pH of the cell surface, but not at the acidic pH of intracellular vesicles. TfR  HFE stoichiometry (2  1) differs from TfR  transferrin stoichiometry (2  2), implying a different mode of binding for HFE and transferrin to TfR, consistent with our demonstration that HFE, transferrin, and TfR form a ternary complex. 

hemochromatosis
Ethnic differences in the HFE codon 282 (Cys/Tyr) polymorphism.
Recent studies have shown that hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is likely to be caused by homozygosity for a Cys282Tyr mutation in the HFE gene located 4. 5 Mb telomeric to HLA-A. Population studies of this polymorphism are facilitated by the fact that the Cys282Tyr mutation creates a Rsal restriction site. We have studied the codon 282 (Cys/Tyr) polymorphism in different ethnic groups. In agreement with previous observations the Tyr allele appeared to be rare or absent in Asiatic (Indian, Chinese) populations. The highest allele frequency (7. 5%) was found in Swedes. Saamis (2%) and Mordvinians (1. 8%) had significantly lower frequencies of the Tyr allele. Comparisons with allele frequencies based on prevalence estimates of HH showed some disagreements with the RFLP data, particularly in Finns. The newly described HFE marker provides a new approach to the screening of HH as well as studies of the relationship between the HFE Tyr allele and different disorders including cancer 

Diagnosis of hemochromatosis.
If untreated, hemochromatosis can cause serious illness and early death, but the disease is still substantially under-diagnosed. The cornerstone of screening and case detection is the measurement of serum transferrin saturation and the serum ferritin level. Once the diagnosis is suspected, physicians must use serum ferritin levels and hepatic iron stores on liver biopsy specimens to assess patients for the presence of iron overload. Liver biopsy is also used to establish the presence or absence of cirrhosis, which can affect prognosis and management. A DNA-based test for the HFE gene is commercially available, but its place in the diagnosis of hemochromatosis is still being evaluated. Currently, the most useful role for this test is in the detection of hemochromatosis in the family members of patients with a proven case of the disease. It is crucial to diagnose hemochromatosis before hepatic cirrhosis develops because phlebotomy therapy can avert serious chronic disease and can even lead to normal life expectancy.. 

The hemochromatosis 845 G-->A and 187 C-->G mutations: prevalence in non-Caucasian populations.
Hemochromatosis, the inherited disorder of iron metabolism, leads, if untreated, to progressive iron overload and premature death. The hemochromatosis gene, HFE, recently has been identified, and characterization of this gene has shown that it contains two mutations that result in amino acid substitutions-cDNA nucleotides 845 G-- > A (C282Y) and 187 C-- > G (H63D). Although hemochromatosis is common in Caucasians, affecting > = 1/300 individuals of northern European origin, it has not been recognized in other populations. The present study used PCR and restriction-enzyme digestion to analyze the frequency of the 845 G-- > A and 187 C-- > G mutations in HLA-typed samples from non-Caucasian populations, comprising Australian Aboriginal, Chinese, and Pacific Islanders. Results showed that the 845 G-- > A mutation was present in these populations (allele frequency 0. 32%), and, furthermore, it was always seen in conjunction with HLA haplotypes common in Caucasians, suggesting that 845 G-- > A may have been introduced into these populations by Caucasian admixture. 187 C-- > G was present at an allele frequency of 2. 68% in the two populations analyzed (Australian Aboriginal and Chinese). In the Australian Aboriginal samples, 187 C-- > G was found to be associated with HLA haplotypes common in Caucasians, suggesting that it was introduced by recent admixture. In the Chinese samples analyzed, 187 C-- > G was present in association with a wide variety of HLA haplotypes, showing this mutation to be widespread and likely to predate the more genetically restricted 845 G-- > A mutation.

The hemochromatosis gene product complexes with the transferrin receptor and lowers its affinity for ligand binding.
We recently reported the positional cloning of a candidate gene for hereditary hemochromatosis called HFE. The gene product, a member of the major histocompatibility complex class I-like family, was found to have a mutation, Cys-282 -- > Tyr (C282Y), in 85% of patient chromosomes. This mutation eliminates the ability of HFE to associate with beta2-microglobulin (beta2m) and prevents cell-surface expression. A second mutation that has no effect on beta2m association, H63D, was found in eight out of nine patients heterozygous for the C282Y mutant. In this report, we demonstrate in cultured 293 cells overexpressing wild-type or mutant HFE proteins that both the wild-type and H63D HFE proteins form stable complexes with the transferrin receptor (TfR). The C282Y mutation nearly completely prevents the association of the mutant HFE protein with the TfR. Studies on cell-associated transferrin at 37 degrees C suggest that the overexpressed wild-type HFE protein decreases the affinity of the TfR for transferrin. The overexpressed H63D protein does not have this effect, providing the first direct evidence for a functional consequence of the H63D mutation. Addition of soluble wild-type HFE/beta2m heterodimers to cultured cells also decreased the apparent affinity of the TfR for its ligand under steady-state conditions, both in 293 cells and in HeLa cells. Furthermore, at 4 degrees C, the added soluble complex of HFE/beta2m inhibited binding of transferrin to HeLa cell TfR in a concentration-dependent manner. Scatchard plots of these data indicate that the added heterodimer substantially reduced the affinity of TfR for transferrin. These results establish a molecular link between HFE and a key protein involved in iron transport, the TfR, and raise the possibility that alterations in this regulatory mechanism may play a role in the pathogenesis of hereditary hemochromatosis.. 
