ATM mutations and phenotypes in ataxia-telangiectasia families in the British Isles: expression of mutant ATM and the risk of leukemia, lymphoma, and breast cancer.
We report the spectrum of 59 ATM mutations observed in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients in the British Isles. Of 51 ATM mutations identified in families native to the British Isles, 11 were founder mutations, and 2 of these 11 conferred a milder clinical phenotype with respect to both cerebellar degeneration and cellular features. We report, in two A-T families, an ATM mutation (7271T-- > G) that may be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in both homozygotes and heterozygotes (relative risk 12. 7; P =. 0025), although there is a less severe A-T phenotype in terms of the degree of cerebellar degeneration. This mutation (7271T-- > G) also allows expression of full-length ATM protein at a level comparable with that in unaffected individuals. In addition, we have studied 18 A-T patients, in 15 families, who developed leukemia, lymphoma, preleukemic T-cell proliferation, or Hodgkin lymphoma, mostly in childhood. A wide variety of ATM mutation types, including missense mutations and in-frame deletions, were seen in these patients. We also show that 25% of all A-T patients carried in-frame deletions or missense mutations, many of which were also associated with expression of mutant ATM protein. 

leukemia
Clustering of missense mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia gene in a sporadic T-cell leukaemia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene at 11q22-q23 (ref. 3). The risk of cancer, especially lymphoid neoplasias, is substantially elevated in A-T patients and has long been associated with chromosomal instability. By analysing tumour DNA from patients with sporadic T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL), a rare clonal malignancy with similarities to a mature T-cell leukaemia seen in A-T, we demonstrate a high frequency of ATM mutations in T-PLL. In marked contrast to the ATM mutation pattern in A-T, the most frequent nucleotide changes in this leukaemia were missense mutations. These clustered in the region corresponding to the kinase domain, which is highly conserved in ATM-related proteins in mouse, yeast and Drosophila. The resulting amino-acid substitutions are predicted to interfere with ATP binding or substrate recognition. Two of seventeen mutated T-PLL samples had a previously reported A-T allele. In contrast, no mutations were detected in the p53 gene, suggesting that this tumour suppressor is not frequently altered in this leukaemia. Occasional missense mutations in ATM were also found in tumour DNA from patients with B-cell non-Hodgkins lymphomas (B-NHL) and a B-NHL cell line. The evidence of a significant proportion of loss-of-function mutations and a complete absence of the normal copy of ATM in the majority of mutated tumours establishes somatic inactivation of this gene in the pathogenesis of sporadic T-PLL and suggests that ATM acts as a tumour suppressor. As constitutional DNA was not available, a putative hereditary predisposition to T-PLL will require further investigation.. 

Human MLH1 deficiency predisposes to hematological malignancy and neurofibromatosis type 1.
Heterozygous germ-line mutations in the DNA mismatch repair genes lead to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. The disease susceptibility of individuals who constitutionally lack both wild-type alleles is unknown. We have identified three offspring in a hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer family who developed hematological malignancy at a very early age, and at least two of them displayed signs of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). DNA sequence analysis and allele-specific amplification in two siblings revealed a homozygous MLH1 mutation (C676T-- > Arg226Stop). Thus, a homozygous germ-line MLH1 mutation and consequent mismatch repair deficiency results in a mutator phenotype characterized by leukemia and/or lymphoma associated with neurofibromatosis type 1.. 
