Myotonic dystrophy protein kinase is involved in the modulation of the Ca2+ homeostasis in skeletal muscle cells.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM), the most prevalent muscular disorder in adults, is caused by (CTG) n-repeat expansion in a gene encoding a protein kinase (DM protein kinase; DMPK) and involves changes in cytoarchitecture and ion homeostasis. To obtain clues to the normal biological role of DMPK in cellular ion homeostasis, we have compared the resting [Ca2 +] i, the amplitude and shape of depolarization-induced Ca2 + transients, and the content of ATP-driven ion pumps in cultured skeletal muscle cells of wild-type and DMPK [-/-] knockout mice. In vitro-differentiated DMPK [-/-] myotubes exhibit a higher resting [Ca2 +] i than do wild-type myotubes because of an altered open probability of voltage-dependent l-type Ca2 + and Na + channels. The mutant myotubes exhibit smaller and slower Ca2 + responses upon triggering by acetylcholine or high external K +. In addition, we observed that these Ca2 + transients partially result from an influx of extracellular Ca2 + through the l-type Ca2 + channel. Neither the content nor the activity of Na +/K + ATPase and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2 + -ATPase are affected by DMPK absence. In conclusion, our data suggest that DMPK is involved in modulating the initial events of excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle.. 

muscular disorder
Insertional mutation by transposable element, L1, in the DMD gene results in X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy.
X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy (XLDCM) is a clinical phenotype of dystrophinopathy which is characterized by preferential myocardial involvement without any overt clinical signs of skeletal myopathy. To date, several mutations in the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene, DMD, have been identified in patients with XLDCM, but a pathogenic correlation of these cardiospecific mutations in DMD with the XLDCM phenotype has remained to be elucidated. We report here the identification of a unique de novo L1 insertion in the muscle exon 1 in DMD in three XLDCM patients from two unrelated Japanese families. The insertion was a 5-truncated form of human L1 inversely integrated in the 5-untranslated region in the muscle exon 1, which affected the transcription or the stability of the muscle form of dystrophin transcripts but not that of the brain or Purkinje cell form, probably due to its unique site of integration. We speculate that this insertion of an L1 sequence in DMD is responsible for some of the population of Japanese patients with XLDCM.. 
