Constitutional RB1-gene mutations in patients with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma.
In most patients with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma, tumor development is initiated by somatic inactivation of both alleles of the RB1 gene. However, some of these patients can transmit retinoblastoma predisposition to their offspring. To determine the frequency and nature of constitutional RB1-gene mutations in patients with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma, we analyzed DNA from peripheral blood and from tumor tissue. The analysis of tumors from 54 (71%) of 76 informative patients showed loss of constitutional heterozygosity (LOH) at intragenic loci. Three of 13 uninformative patients had constitutional deletions. For 39 randomly selected tumors, SSCP, hetero-duplex analysis, sequencing, and Southern blot analysis were used to identify mutations. Mutations were detected in 21 (91%) of 23 tumors with LOH. In 6 (38%) of 16 tumors without LOH, one mutation was detected, and in 9 (56%) of the tumors without LOH, both mutations were found. Thus, a total of 45 mutations were identified in tumors of 36 patients. Thirty-nine of the mutations-including 34 small mutations, 2 large structural alterations, and hypermethylation in 3 tumors-were not detected in the corresponding peripheral blood DNA. In 6 (17%) of the 36 patients, a mutation was detected in constitutional DNA, and 1 of these mutations is known to be associated with reduced expressivity. The presence of a constitutional mutation was not associated with an early age at treatment. In 1 patient, somatic mosaicism was demonstrated by molecular analysis of DNA and RNA from peripheral blood. In 2 patients without a detectable mutation in peripheral blood, mosaicism was suggested because 1 of the patients showed multifocal tumors and the other later developed bilateral retinoblastoma. In conclusion, our results emphasize that the manifestation and transmissibility of retinoblastoma depend on the nature of the first mutation, its time in development, and the number and types of cells that are affected.. 

tumor
Founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in French Canadian breast and ovarian cancer families.
We have identified four mutations in each of the breast cancer-susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, in French Canadian breast cancer and breast/ovarian cancer families from Quebec. To identify founder effects, we examined independently ascertained French Canadian cancer families for the distribution of these eight mutations. Mutations were found in 41 of 97 families. Six of eight mutations were observed at least twice. The BRCA1 C4446T mutation was the most common mutation found, followed by the BRCA2 8765delAG mutation. Together, these mutations were found in 28 of 41 families identified to have a mutation. The odds of detection of any of the four BRCA1 mutations was 18. 7x greater if one or more cases of ovarian cancer were also present in the family. The odds of detection of any of the four BRCA2 mutations was 5. 3x greater if there were at least five cases of breast cancer in the family. Interestingly, the presence of a breast cancer case < 36 years of age was strongly predictive of the presence of any of the eight mutations screened. Carriers of the same mutation, from different families, shared similar haplotypes, indicating that the mutant alleles were likely to be identical by descent for a mutation in the founder population. The identification of common BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations will facilitate carrier detection in French Canadian breast cancer and breast/ovarian cancer families.

Stable interaction between the products of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes in mitotic and meiotic cells.
BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for most cases of familial, early onset breast and/or ovarian cancer and encode products that each interact with hRAD51. Results presented here show that BRCA1 and BRCA2 coexist in a biochemical complex and colocalize in subnuclear foci in somatic cells and on the axial elements of developing synaptonemal complexes. Like BRCA1 and RAD51, BRCA2 relocates to PCNA + replication sites following exposure of S phase cells to hydroxyurea or UV irradiation. Thus, BRCA1 and BRCA2 participate, together, in a pathway (s) associated with the activation of double-strand break repair and/or homologous recombination. Dysfunction of this pathway may be a general phenomenon in the majority of cases of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer.. 

Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype analyses in Cowden disease and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome, two hamartoma syndromes with germline PTEN mutation.
The tumour suppressor gene PTEN, which maps to 10q23. 3 and encodes a 403 amino acid dual specificity phosphatase (protein tyrosine phosphatase; PTPase), was shown recently to play a broad role in human malignancy. Somatic PTEN deletions and mutations were observed in sporadic breast, brain, prostate and kidney cancer cell lines and in several primary tumours such as endometrial carcinomas, malignant melanoma and thyroid tumours. In addition, PTEN was identified as the susceptibility gene for two hamartoma syndromes  Cowden disease (CD; MIM 158350) and Bannayan-Zonana (BZS) or Ruvalcaba-Riley-Smith syndrome (MIM 153480). Constitutive DNA from 37 CD families and seven BZS families was screened for germline PTEN mutations. PTEN mutations were identified in 30 of 37 (81%) CD families, including missense and nonsense point mutations, deletions, insertions, a deletion/insertion and splice site mutations. These mutations were scattered over the entire length of PTEN, with the exception of the first, fourth and last exons. A hot spot for PTEN mutation in CD was identified in exon 5 that contains the PTPase core motif, with 13 of 30 (43%) CD mutations identified in this exon. Seven of 30 (23%) were within the core motif, the majority (five of seven) of which were missense mutations, possibly pointing to the functional significance of this region. Germline PTEN mutations were identified in four of seven (57%) BZS families studied. Interestingly, none of these mutations was observed in the PTPase core motif. It is also worthy of note that a single nonsense point mutation, R233X, was observed in the germline DNA from two unrelated CD families and one BZS family. Genotype-phenotype studies were not performed on this small group of BZS families. However, genotype-phenotype analysis inthe group of CD families revealed two possible associations worthy of follow-up in independent analyses. The first was an association noted in the group of CD families with breast disease. A correlation was observed between the presence/absence of a PTEN mutation and the type of breast involvement (unaffected versus benign versus malignant). Specifically and more directly, an association was also observed between the presence of a PTEN mutation and malignant breast disease. Secondly, there appeared to be an interdependent association between mutations upstream and within the PTPase core motif, the core motif containing the majority of missense mutations, and the involvement of all major organ systems (central nervous system, thyroid, breast, skin and gastrointestinal tract). However, these observations would need to be confirmed by studying a larger number of CD families. 

I1307K APC and hMLH1 mutations in a non-Jewish family with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer.
We describe a French Canadian hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) kindred which carries a novel truncating mutation in hMLH1. Interestingly, the I1307K APC polymorphism, associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer, is also present in this family. The I1307K polymorphism has previously only been identified in individuals of self-reported Ashkenazi Jewish origins. In addition, in this family, there appears to be no relationship between the I1307K polymorphism and the presence or absence of cancer.. 

Ethnic differences in the HFE codon 282 (Cys/Tyr) polymorphism.
Recent studies have shown that hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is likely to be caused by homozygosity for a Cys282Tyr mutation in the HFE gene located 4. 5 Mb telomeric to HLA-A. Population studies of this polymorphism are facilitated by the fact that the Cys282Tyr mutation creates a Rsal restriction site. We have studied the codon 282 (Cys/Tyr) polymorphism in different ethnic groups. In agreement with previous observations the Tyr allele appeared to be rare or absent in Asiatic (Indian, Chinese) populations. The highest allele frequency (7. 5%) was found in Swedes. Saamis (2%) and Mordvinians (1. 8%) had significantly lower frequencies of the Tyr allele. Comparisons with allele frequencies based on prevalence estimates of HH showed some disagreements with the RFLP data, particularly in Finns. The newly described HFE marker provides a new approach to the screening of HH as well as studies of the relationship between the HFE Tyr allele and different disorders including cancer 

Clustering of missense mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia gene in a sporadic T-cell leukaemia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene at 11q22-q23 (ref. 3). The risk of cancer, especially lymphoid neoplasias, is substantially elevated in A-T patients and has long been associated with chromosomal instability. By analysing tumour DNA from patients with sporadic T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL), a rare clonal malignancy with similarities to a mature T-cell leukaemia seen in A-T, we demonstrate a high frequency of ATM mutations in T-PLL. In marked contrast to the ATM mutation pattern in A-T, the most frequent nucleotide changes in this leukaemia were missense mutations. These clustered in the region corresponding to the kinase domain, which is highly conserved in ATM-related proteins in mouse, yeast and Drosophila. The resulting amino-acid substitutions are predicted to interfere with ATP binding or substrate recognition. Two of seventeen mutated T-PLL samples had a previously reported A-T allele. In contrast, no mutations were detected in the p53 gene, suggesting that this tumour suppressor is not frequently altered in this leukaemia. Occasional missense mutations in ATM were also found in tumour DNA from patients with B-cell non-Hodgkins lymphomas (B-NHL) and a B-NHL cell line. The evidence of a significant proportion of loss-of-function mutations and a complete absence of the normal copy of ATM in the majority of mutated tumours establishes somatic inactivation of this gene in the pathogenesis of sporadic T-PLL and suggests that ATM acts as a tumour suppressor. As constitutional DNA was not available, a putative hereditary predisposition to T-PLL will require further investigation.. 

Down-regulation of transmembrane carbonic anhydrases in renal cell carcinoma cell lines by wild-type von Hippel-Lindau transgenes.
To discover genes involved in von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) -mediated carcinogenesis, we used renal cell carcinoma cell lines stably transfected with wild-type VHL-expressing transgenes. Large-scale RNA differential display technology applied to these cell lines identified several differentially expressed genes, including an alpha carbonic anhydrase gene, termed CA12. The deduced protein sequence was classified as a one-pass transmembrane CA possessing an apparently intact catalytic domain in the extracellular CA module. Reintroduced wild-type VHL strongly inhibited the overexpression of the CA12 gene in the parental renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Similar results were obtained with CA9, encoding another transmembrane CA with an intact catalytic domain. Although both domains of the VHL protein contribute to regulation of CA12 expression, the elongin binding domain alone could effectively regulate CA9 expression. We mapped CA12 and CA9 loci to chromosome bands 15q22 and 17q21. 2 respectively, regions prone to amplification in some human cancers. Additional experiments are needed to define the role of CA IX and CA XII enzymes in the regulation of pH in the extracellular microenvironment and its potential impact on cancer cell growth. 

Frequent inactivation of PTEN/MMAC1 in primary prostate cancer.
Sporadic prostate carcinoma is the most common male cancer in the Western world, yet many of the major genetic events involved in the progression of this often fatal cancer remain to be elucidated. Numerous cytogenetic and allelotype studies have reported frequent loss of heterozygosity on chromosomal arm 10q in sporadic prostate cancer. Deletion mapping studies have unambiguously identified a region of chromosome 10q23 to be the minimal area of loss. A new tumor suppressor gene, PTEN/MMAC1, was isolated recently at this region of chromosome 10q23 and found to be inactivated by mutation in three prostate cancer cell lines. We screened 80 prostate tumors by microsatellite analysis and found chromosome 10q23 to be deleted in 23 cases. We then proceeded with sequence analysis of the entire PTEN/MMAC1 coding region and tested for homozygous deletion with new intragenic markers in these 23 cases with 10q23 loss of heterozygosity. The identification of the second mutational event in 10 (43%) tumors establishes PTEN/MMAC1 as a main inactivation target of 10q loss in sporadic prostate cancer.. 

Genotype-phenotype correlations in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli.
Germ-line mutations of the tumor suppressor APC are implicated in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC), a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). AAPC is recognized by the occurrence of < 100 colonic adenomas and a later onset of colorectal cancer (age > 40 years). The aim of this study was to assess genotype-phenotype correlations in AAPC families. By protein-truncation test (PTT) assay, the entire coding region of the APC gene was screened in affected individuals from 11 AAPC kindreds, and their phenotypic differences were examined. Five novel germ-line APC mutations were identified in seven kindreds. Mutations were located in three different regions of the APC gene  (1) at the 5 end spanning exons 4 and 5, (2) within exon 9, and (3) at the 3 distal end of the gene. Variability in the number of colorectal adenomas was most apparent in individuals with mutations in region 1, and upper-gastrointestinal manifestations were more severe in them. In individuals with mutations in either region 2 or region 3, the average number of adenomas tended to be lower than those in individuals with mutations in region 1, although age at diagnosis was similar. In all AAPC kindreds, a predominance of right-sided colorectal adenomas and rectal polyp sparing was observed. No desmoid tumors were found in these kindreds. Our data suggest that, in AAPC families, the location of the APC mutation may partially predict specific phenotypic expression. This should help in the design of tailored clinical-management protocols in this subset of FAP patients.. 

The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene is required for cell cycle exit upon serum withdrawal.
The inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene predisposes affected individuals to the human VHL cancer syndrome and is associated with sporadic renal cell carcinomas (RCC) and brain hemangioblastomas. VHL-negative 786-0 RCC cells are tumorigenic in nude mice which is suppressed by the reintroduction of VHL. Remarkably, this occurs without affecting the growth rate and cell cycle profile of these cells in culture. The 786-0 cell line, like many cancer cells, fails to exit the cell cycle upon serum withdrawal. Here, it is shown that reintroduction of the wild-type VHL gene restores the ability of VHL-negative RCC cancer cells to exit the cell cycle and enter G0/quiescence in low serum. Both VHL-positive and VHL-negative RCC cells exit the cell cycle by contact inhibition. The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p27, accumulates upon serum withdrawal, only in the presence of VHL, as a result of the stabilization of the protein. We propose that the loss of wild-type VHL gene results in a specific cellular defect in serum-dependent growth control, which may initiate tumor formation. This is corrected by the reintroduction of wild-type VHL, implicating VHL as the first tumor suppressor involved in the regulation of cell cycle exit, which is consistent with its gatekeeper function in the kidney.. 

Cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 proteins in discrete nuclear domains.
Germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene predispose women to early-onset breast and ovarian cancer by compromising the genes presumptive function as a tumor suppressor. Although the biochemical properties of BRCA1 polypeptides are not understood, their expression pattern and subcellular localization suggest a role in cell-cycle regulation. When resting cells are induced to proliferate, the steady-state levels of BRCA1 increase in late G1 and reach a maximum during S phase. Moreover, in S phase cells, BRCA1 polypeptides are hyperphosphorylated and accumulate into discrete subnuclear foci termed " BRCA1 nuclear dots. " BRCA1 associates in vivo with a structurally related protein termed BARD1. Here we show that the steady-state levels of BARD1, unlike those of BRCA1, remain relatively constant during cell cycle progression. However, immunostaining revealed that BARD1 resides within BRCA1 nuclear dots during S phase of the cell cycle, but not during the G1 phase. Nevertheless, BARD1 polypeptides are found exclusively in the nuclear fractions of both G1- and S-phase cells. Therefore, progression to S phase is accompanied by the aggregation of nuclear BARD1 polypeptides into BRCA1 nuclear dots. This cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 indicates a role for BARD1 in BRCA1-mediated tumor suppression. 

Prevalence of the I1307K APC gene variant in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal cancer.
BACKGROUND & AIMS  Israeli Jews of European birth, i. e., Ashkenazim, have the highest colorectal cancer incidence of any Israeli ethnic group. The I1307K APC gene variant was found in 6. 1% of American Jews, 28% of their familial colorectal cancer cases, but not in non-Jews. We assessed the I1307K prevalence in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal cancer. METHODS  DNA samples from 500 unrelated Jews of European or non-European origin, with or without a personal and/or family history of neoplasia, were examined for the I1307K variant by the allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) method. RESULTS  In persons at average risk for colorectal cancer, I1307K was found in 5. 0% of 120 European and 1. 6% of 188 non-European Jews (P = 0. 08). It occurred in 15. 4% of 52 Ashkenazi Israelis with familial cancer (P = 0. 02) and was not detected in 51 non-European Jews at increased cancer risk. Colorectal neoplasia occurred personally or in the families of 13 of 20 Ashkenazi I1307K carriers, 8 of whom also had a personal or family history of noncolonic neoplasia. CONCLUSIONS  The I1307K APC variant may represent a susceptibility gene for colorectal, or other, cancers in Ashkenazi Jews, and partially explains the higher incidence of colorectal cancer in European Israelis.

The APCI1307K allele and cancer risk in a community-based study of Ashkenazi Jews.
Mutations in APC are classically associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a highly penetrant autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple intestinal polyps and, without surgical intervention, the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). APC is a tumour-suppressor gene, and somatic loss occurs in tumours. The germline T-to-A transversion responsible for the APC I1307K allele converts the wild-type sequence to a homopolymer tract (A8) that is genetically unstable and prone to somatic mutation. The I1307K allele was found in 6. 1% of unselected Ashkenazi Jews and higher proportions of Ashkenazim with family or personal histories of CRC (ref. 2). To evaluate the role of I1307K in cancer, we genotyped 5, 081 Ashkenazi volunteers in a community survey. Risk of developing colorectal, breast and other cancers were compared between genotyped I1307K carriers and non-carriers and their first-degree relatives. 

Inherited colorectal polyposis and cancer risk of the APC I1307K polymorphism.
Germ-line and somatic truncating mutations of the APC gene are thought to initiate colorectal tumor formation in familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and sporadic colorectal carcinogenesis, respectively. Recently, an isoleucine-- > lysine polymorphism at codon 1307 (I1307K) of the APC gene has been identified in 6% -7% of the Ashkenazi Jewish population. To assess the risk of this common APC allelic variant in colorectal carcinogenesis, we have analyzed a large cohort of unselected Ashkenazi Jewish subjects with adenomatous polyps and. or colorectal cancer, for the APC I1307K polymorphism. The APC I1307K allele was identified in 48 (10. 1%) of 476 patients. Compared with the frequency in two separate population control groups, the APC I1307K allele is associated with an estimated relative risk of 1. 5-1. 7 for colorectal neoplasia (both P =. 01). Furthermore, compared with noncarriers, APC I1307K carriers had increased numbers of adenomas and colorectal cancers per patient (P =. 03), as well as a younger age at diagnosis. We conclude that the APC I1307K variant leads to increased adenoma formation and directly contributes to 3% -4% of all Ashkenazi Jewish colorectal cancer. The estimated relative risk for carriers may justify specific clinical screening for the 360, 000 Americans expected to harbor this allele, and genetic testing in the setting of long-term-outcome studies may impact significantly on colorectal cancer prevention in this population.

Detection of heterozygous carriers of the ataxia-telangiectasia (ATM) gene by G2 phase chromosomal radiosensitivity of peripheral blood lymphocytes.
In ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients, mutations in a single gene, ATM, result in an autosomal recessive syndrome that embraces a variety of clinical features and manifests extreme radiosensitivity and a strong pre-disposition to malignancy. Heterozygotes for the ATM gene have no clinical expression of A-T but may be cancer prone with a moderate increase in in vitro radiosensitivity. We performed a blind chromosomal analysis on G2-phase lymphocytes from 7 unrelated A-T patients, 13 obligate A-T heterozygotes (parents of the patients), and 14 normal controls following X-irradiation with 1 Gy in order to evaluate this cytogenetic method as a tool for detection of ATM carriers. Both A-T homozygotes and heterozygotes showed significantly increased levels of radiation-induced chromatid damage relative to that of normal controls. These results show that the G2-phase chromosomal radiosensitivity assay can be used for the detection of A-T heterozygotes. In combination with molecular genetic analyses, this test may be of value in studies of familial and sporadic cancers aimed at determination of the potential involvement of ATM mutations in tumor risk or development.. 

Genetic heterogeneity and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer families. The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium.
The contribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to inherited breast cancer was assessed by linkage and mutation analysis in 237 families, each with at least four cases of breast cancer, collected by the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Families were included without regard to the occurrence of ovarian or other cancers. Overall, disease was linked to BRCA1 in an estimated 52% of families, to BRCA2 in 32% of families, and to neither gene in 16% (95% confidence interval [CI] 6% -28%), suggesting other predisposition genes. The majority (81%) of the breast-ovarian cancer families were due to BRCA1, with most others (14%) due to BRCA2. Conversely, the majority of families with male and female breast cancer were due to BRCA2 (76%). The largest proportion (67%) of families due to other genes was found in families with four or five cases of female breast cancer only. These estimates were not substantially affected either by changing the assumed penetrance model for BRCA1 or by including or excluding BRCA1 mutation data. Among those families with disease due to BRCA1 that were tested by one of the standard screening methods, mutations were detected in the coding sequence or splice sites in an estimated 63% (95% CI 51% -77%). The estimated sensitivity was identical for direct sequencing and other techniques. The penetrance of BRCA2 was estimated by maximizing the LOD score in BRCA2-mutation families, over all possible penetrance functions. The estimated cumulative risk of breast cancer reached 28% (95% CI 9% -44%) by age 50 years and 84% (95% CI 43% -95%) by age 70 years. The corresponding ovarian cancer risks were 0. 4% (95% CI 0% -1%) by age 50 years and 27% (95% CI 0% -47%) by age 70 years. The lifetime risk of breast cancer appears similar to the risk in BRCA1 carriers, but there was some suggestion of a lower risk in BRCA2 carriers < 50 years of age. 

The tumor suppressor gene Smad4/Dpc4 is required for gastrulation and later for anterior development of the mouse embryo.
Mutations in the SMAD4/DPC4 tumor suppressor gene, a key signal transducer in most TGFbeta-related pathways, are involved in 50% of pancreatic cancers. Homozygous Smad4 mutant mice die before day 7. 5 of embryogenesis. Mutant embryos have reduced size, fail to gastrulate or express a mesodermal marker, and show abnormal visceral endoderm development. Growth retardation of the Smad4-deficient embryos results from reduced cell proliferation rather than increased apoptosis. Aggregation of mutant Smad4 ES cells with wild-type tetraploid morulae rescues the gastrulation defect. These results indicate that Smad4 is initially required for the differentiation of the visceral endoderm and that the gastrulation defect in the epiblast is secondary and non-cell autonomous. Rescued embryos show severe anterior truncations, indicating a second important role for Smad4 in anterior patterning during embryogenesis. 

A novel missense mutation in patients from a retinoblastoma pedigree showing only mild expression of the tumor phenotype.
We have used single strand conformation polymorphism analysis to study the 27 exons of the RB1 gene in individuals from a family showing mild expression of the retinoblastoma phenotype. In this family affected individuals developed unilateral tumors and, as a result of linkage analysis, unaffected mutation carriers were also identified within the pedigree. A single band shift using SSCP was identified in exon 21 which resulted in a missense mutation converting a cys-- > arg at nucleotide position 28 in the exon. The mutation destroyed an NdeI restriction enzyme site. Analysis of all family members demonstrated that the missense mutation co-segregated with patients with tumors or who, as a result of linkage analysis had been predicted to carry the predisposing mutation. These observations point to another region of the RB1 gene where mutations only modify the function of the gene and raise important questions for genetic counseling in families with these distinctive phenotypes.. 

Localization of human BRCA1 and its loss in high-grade, non-inherited breast carcinomas.
Although the link between the BRCA1 tumour-suppressor gene and hereditary breast and ovarian cancer is established, the role, if any, of BRCA1 in non-familial cancers is unclear. BRCA1 mutations are rare in sporadic cancers, but loss of BRCA1 resulting from reduced expression or incorrect subcellular localization is postulated to be important in non-familial breast and ovarian cancers. Epigenetic loss, however, has not received general acceptance due to controversy regarding the subcellular localization of BRCA1 proteins, reports of which have ranged from exclusively nuclear, to conditionally nuclear, to the ER/golgi, to cytoplasmic invaginations into the nucleus. In an attempt to resolve this issue, we have comprehensively characterized 19 anti-BRCA1 antibodies. These reagents detect a 220-kD protein localized in discrete nuclear foci in all epithelial cell lines, including those derived from breast malignancies. Immunohistochemical staining of human breast specimens also revealed BRCA1 nuclear foci in benign breast, invasive lobular cancers and low-grade ductal carcinomas. Conversely, BRCA1 expression was reduced or undetectable in the majority of high-grade, ductal carcinomas, suggesting that absence of BRCA1 may contribute to the pathogenesis of a significant percentage of sporadic breast cancers.. 
