Disruption of splicing regulated by a CUG-binding protein in myotonic dystrophy.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is caused by a CTG expansion in the 3 untranslated region of the DM gene. One model of DM pathogenesis suggests that RNAs from the expanded allele create a gain-of-function mutation by the inappropriate binding of proteins to the CUG repeats. Data presented here indicate that the conserved heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein, CUG-binding protein (CUG-BP), may mediate the trans-dominant effect of the RNA. CUG-BP was found to bind to the human cardiac troponin T (cTNT) pre-messenger RNA and regulate its alternative splicing. Splicing of cTNT was disrupted in DM striated muscle and in normal cells expressing transcripts that contain CUG repeats. Altered expression of genes regulated posttranscriptionally by CUG-BP therefore may contribute to DM pathogenesis.. 

myotonic dystrophy
Segregation distortion in myotonic dystrophy.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant disease which, in the typical pedigree, shows a three generation anticipation cascade. This results in infertility and congenital myotonic dystrophy (CDM) with the disappearance of DM in that pedigree. The concept of segregation distortion, where there is preferential transmission of the larger allele at the DM locus, has been put forward to explain partially the maintenance of DM in the population. In a survey of DM in Northern Ireland, 59 pedigrees were ascertained. Sibships where the status of all the members had been identified were examined to determine the transmission of the DM expansion from affected parents to their offspring. Where the transmitting parent was male, 58. 3% of the offspring were affected, and in the case of a female transmitting parent, 68. 7% were affected. Studies on meiotic drive in DM have shown increased transmission of the larger allele at the DM locus in non-DM heterozygotes for CTGn. This study provides further evidence that the DM expansion tends to be transmitted preferentially.

Somatic instability of the CTG repeat in mice transgenic for the myotonic dystrophy region is age dependent but not correlated to the relative intertissue transcription levels and proliferative capacities.
A (CTG) nexpansion in the 3-untranslated region (UTR) of the DM protein kinase gene (DMPK) is responsible for causing myotonic dystrophy (DM). Major instability, with very large expansions between generations and high levels of somatic mosaicism, is observed in patients. There is a good correlation between repeat size (at least in leucocytes), clinical severity and age of onset. The trinucleotide repeat instability mechanisms involved in DM and other human genetic diseases are unknown. We studied somatic instability by measuring the CTG repeat length at several ages in various tissues of transgenic mice carrying a (CTG) 55expansion surrounded by 45 kb of the human DM region, using small-pool PCR. These mice have been shown to reproduce the intergenerational and somatic instability of the 55 CTG repeat suggesting that surrounding sequences and the chromatin environment are involved in instability mechanisms. As observed in some of the tissues of DM patients, there is a tendency for repeat length and somatic mosaicism to increase with the age of the mouse. Furthermore, we observed no correlation between the somatic mutation rate and tissue proliferation capacity. The somatic mutation rates in different tissues were also not correlated to the relative inter-tissue difference in transcriptional levels of the three genes (DMAHP, DMPK and 59) surrounding the repeat.. 

Myotonic dystrophy protein kinase is involved in the modulation of the Ca2+ homeostasis in skeletal muscle cells.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM), the most prevalent muscular disorder in adults, is caused by (CTG) n-repeat expansion in a gene encoding a protein kinase (DM protein kinase; DMPK) and involves changes in cytoarchitecture and ion homeostasis. To obtain clues to the normal biological role of DMPK in cellular ion homeostasis, we have compared the resting [Ca2 +] i, the amplitude and shape of depolarization-induced Ca2 + transients, and the content of ATP-driven ion pumps in cultured skeletal muscle cells of wild-type and DMPK [-/-] knockout mice. In vitro-differentiated DMPK [-/-] myotubes exhibit a higher resting [Ca2 +] i than do wild-type myotubes because of an altered open probability of voltage-dependent l-type Ca2 + and Na + channels. The mutant myotubes exhibit smaller and slower Ca2 + responses upon triggering by acetylcholine or high external K +. In addition, we observed that these Ca2 + transients partially result from an influx of extracellular Ca2 + through the l-type Ca2 + channel. Neither the content nor the activity of Na +/K + ATPase and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2 + -ATPase are affected by DMPK absence. In conclusion, our data suggest that DMPK is involved in modulating the initial events of excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle.. 

Further evidence for a major ancient mutation underlying myotonic dystrophy from linkage disequilibrium studies in the Japanese population.
The myotonic dystrophy (DM) mutation is an unstable (CTG) n repeat, present at a copy number of 5-37 repeats on normal chromosomes but amplified to 50-3000 copies on DM chromosomes. Previous findings in Caucasian populations of a DM founder chromosome raise a question about the molecular events involved in the expansion mutation. To investigate whether a founder chromosome for the DM mutation exists in the Japanese population, we genotyped families using polymorphic markers near the (CTG) n repeat region and constructed haplotypes. Six different haplotypes were found and DM alleles were always haplotype A. To find an origin of the (CTG) n repeat mutation and to investigate the mechanism of the expansion mutation in the Japanese population we have studied 90 Japanese DM families comprising 190 affected and 130 unaffected members. The results suggest that a few common ancestral mutations in both Caucasian and Japanese populations have originated by expansion of an ancestral n = 5 repeat to n = 19-37 copies. These data support multistep models of triplet repeat expansion that have been proposed for both DM and Friedreichs ataxia.. 

The DMPK gene of severely affected myotonic dystrophy patients is hypermethylated proximal to the largely expanded CTG repeat.
Using methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes, we characterized the methylation pattern on the 5 side of the CTG repeat in the DMPK gene of normal individuals and of patients affected with myotonic dystrophy, showing expansions of the repetitive sequence. The gene segment analyzed corresponds to the genomic SacI-HindIII fragment carrying exons 11-15. There is constitutive methylation in intron 12 at restriction sites of SacII and HhaI, localized 1, 159-1, 232 bp upstream of the CTG repeat, whereas most, if not all, of the other sites of SacII, HhaI, and HpaII in this region are unmethylated, in normal individuals and most of the patients. In a number of young and severely affected patients, however, complete methylation of these restriction sites was found in the mutated allele. In most of these patients, the onset of the disease was congenital. Preliminary in vivo footprinting data gave evidence for protein-DNA contact in normal genes at an Sp1 consensus binding site upstream of the CTG repeat and for a significant reduction of this interaction in cells with a hypermethylated DMPK gene.. 

Progression of somatic CTG repeat length heterogeneity in the blood cells of myotonic dystrophy patients.
The genetic basis of myotonic dystrophy (DM) is the expansion of an unstable CTG repeat in the 34 UTR of the DM protein kinase gene on chromosome 19. One of the principal features of the DM mutation is an extraordinarily high level of somatic mosaicism, due to an extremely high degree of somatic instability both within and between different tissues. This instability appears to be biased towards further expansion and continuous throughout the life of an individual, features that could be associated with the progressive nature of the disease. Although increasing measured allele size between patients clearly correlates with an increased severity of symptoms and an earlier age of onset, this correlation is not precise and measured allele length cannot be used as an accurate predictor of age of onset. In order to further characterize the dynamics of DM CTG repeat somatic instability, we have studied repeat length changes over time in 111 myotonic dystrophy patients with varying clinical severity and CTG repeat size over time intervals of 1-7 years. We have found a direct progression of the size heterogeneity over time related to initial CTG repeat size and the time interval and always biased towards further expansion. Attempts to mathematically model the dynamics have proved only partially successful suggesting that individual specific genetic and/or environmental factors also play a role in somatic mosaicism.. 

Paternal transmission of congenital myotonic dystrophy.
We report a rare case of paternally transmitted congenital myotonic dystrophy (DM). The proband is a 23 year old, mentally retarded male who suffers severe muscular weakness. He presented with respiratory and feeding difficulties at birth. His two sibs suffer from childhood onset DM. Their late father had the adult type of DM, with onset around 30 years. Only six other cases of paternal transmission of congenital DM have been reported recently. We review the sex related effects on transmission of congenital DM. Decreased fertility of males with adult onset DM and contraction of the repeat upon male transmission contribute to the almost absent occurrence of paternal transmission of congenital DM. Also the fathers of the reported congenitally affected children showed, on average, shorter CTG repeat lengths and hence less severe clinical symptoms than the mothers of children with congenital DM. We conclude that paternal transmission of congenital DM is rare and preferentially occurs with onset of DM past 30 years in the father.. 
