Wilms' tumor 1 and Dax-1 modulate the orphan nuclear receptor SF-1 in sex-specific gene expression.
Products of steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) and Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) genes are essential for mammalian gonadogenesis prior to sexual differentiation. In males, SF-1 participates in sexual development by regulating expression of the polypeptide hormone Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS). Here, we show that WT1 -KTS isoforms associate and synergize with SF-1 to promote MIS expression. In contrast, WT1 missense mutations, associated with male pseudohermaphroditism in Denys-Drash syndrome, fail to synergize with SF-1. Additionally, the X-linked, candidate dosage-sensitive sex-reversal gene, Dax-1, antagonizes synergy between SF-1 and WT1, most likely through a direct interaction with SF-1. We propose that WT1 and Dax-1 functionally oppose each other in testis development by modulating SF-1-mediated transactivation.. 

Wilms' tumor
Identification of constitutional WT1 mutations, in patients with isolated diffuse mesangial sclerosis, and analysis of genotype/phenotype correlations by use of a computerized mutation database.
Constitutional mutations of the WT1 gene, encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor involved in renal and gonadal development, are found in most patients with Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), or diffuse mesangial sclerosis (DMS) associated with pseudohermaphroditism and/or Wilms tumor (WT). Most mutations in DDS patients lie in exon 8 or exon 9, encoding zinc finger 2 or zinc finger 3, respectively, with a hot spot (R394W) in exon 9. We analyzed a series of 24 patients, 10 with isolated DMS (IDMS), 10 with DDS, and 4 with urogenital abnormalities and/or WT. We report WT1 heterozygous mutations in 16 patients, 4 of whom presented with IDMS. One male and two female IDMS patients with WT1 mutations underwent normal puberty. Two mutations associated with IDMS are different from those described in DDS patients. No WT1 mutations were detected in the six other IDMS patients, suggesting genetic heterogeneity of this disease. We analyzed genotype/phenotype correlations, on the basis of the constitution of a WT1 mutation database of 84 germ-line mutations, to compare the distribution and type of mutations, according to the different symptoms. This demonstrated (1) the association between mutations in exons 8 and 9 and DMS; (2) among patients with DMS, a higher frequency of exon 8 mutations among 46, XY patients with female phenotype than among 46, XY patients with sexual ambiguity or male phenotype; and (3) statistically significant evidence that mutations in exons 8 and 9 preferentially affect amino acids with different functions.. 
