Reversal of severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and excellent neuropsychologic outcome in very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency.
Very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is a disorder of fatty acid beta oxidation that reportedly has high rates of morbidity and mortality. We describe the outcome of a 5-year-old girl with VLCAD deficiency who was first seen at 5 months of age with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hepatomegaly, encephalopathy, and hypotonia. Biochemical studies indicated VLCAD deficiency caused by a stable yet inactive enzyme. Molecular genetic analysis of her VLCAD gene revealed a T1372C (F458L) missense mutation and a 1668 ACAG 1669 splice site mutation. After initial treatment with intravenous glucose and carnitine, the patient has thrived on a low-fat diet supplemented with medium-chain triglyceride oil and carnitine and avoidance of fasting. Her ventricular hypertrophy resolved significantly over 1 year, and cognitively, she is in the superior range for age. Clinical recognition of VLCAD deficiency is important because it is one of the few directly treatable causes of cardiomyopathy in children.. 

cardiomyopathy
Insertional mutation by transposable element, L1, in the DMD gene results in X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy.
X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy (XLDCM) is a clinical phenotype of dystrophinopathy which is characterized by preferential myocardial involvement without any overt clinical signs of skeletal myopathy. To date, several mutations in the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene, DMD, have been identified in patients with XLDCM, but a pathogenic correlation of these cardiospecific mutations in DMD with the XLDCM phenotype has remained to be elucidated. We report here the identification of a unique de novo L1 insertion in the muscle exon 1 in DMD in three XLDCM patients from two unrelated Japanese families. The insertion was a 5-truncated form of human L1 inversely integrated in the 5-untranslated region in the muscle exon 1, which affected the transcription or the stability of the muscle form of dystrophin transcripts but not that of the brain or Purkinje cell form, probably due to its unique site of integration. We speculate that this insertion of an L1 sequence in DMD is responsible for some of the population of Japanese patients with XLDCM.. 
