Maternal disomy and Prader-Willi syndrome consistent with gamete complementation in a case of familial translocation (3;15) (p25;q11.2).
Maternal uniparental disomy (UPD) for chromosome 15 is responsible for an estimated 30% of cases of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). We report on an unusual case of maternal disomy 15 in PWS that is most consistent with adjacent-1 segregation of a paternal t (3; 15) (p25; q11. 2) with simultaneous maternal meiotic nondisjunction for chromosome 15. The patient (J. B.), a 17-year-old white male with PWS, was found to have 47 chromosomes with a supernumerary, paternal der (15) consisting of the short arm and the proximal long arm of chromosome 15, and distal chromosome arm 3p. The t (3; 15) was present in the balanced state in the patients father and a sister. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis demonstrated that the PWS critical region resided on the derivative chromosome 3 and that there was no deletion of the PWS region on the normal pair of 15s present in J. B. Methylation analysis at exon alpha of the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein-associated polypeptide N (SNRPN) gene showed a pattern characteristic of only the maternal chromosome 15 in J. B. Maternal disomy was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction analysis of microsatellite repeats at the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor beta3 subunit (GABRB3) locus. A niece (B. B.) with 45 chromosomes and the derivative 3 but without the der (15) demonstrated a phenotype consistent with that reported for haploinsufficiency of distal 3 p. Uniparental disomy associated with unbalanced segregation of non-Robertsonian translocations has been reported previously but has not, to our knowledge, been observed in a case of PWS. Furthermore, our findings are best interpreted as true gamete complementation resulting in maternal UPD 15 and PWS 

Prader-Willi syndrome
A mouse model for Prader-Willi syndrome imprinting-centre mutations.
Imprinting in the 15q11-q13 region involves an imprinting centre (IC), mapping in part to the promoter and first exon of SNRPN. Deletion of this IC abolishes local paternally derived gene expression and results in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). We have created two deletion mutations in mice to understand PWS and the mechanism of this IC. Mice harbouring an intragenic deletion in Snrpn are phenotypically normal, suggesting that mutations of SNRPN are not sufficient to induce PWS. Mice with a larger deletion involving both Snrpn and the putative PWS-IC lack expression of the imprinted genes Zfp127 (mouse homologue of ZNF127), Ndn and Ipw, and manifest several phenotypes common to PWS infants. These data demonstrate that both the position of the IC and its role in the coordinate expression of genes is conserved between mouse and human, and indicate that the mouse is a suitable model system in which to investigate the molecular mechanisms of imprinting in this region of the genome.. 
