Constitutional RB1-gene mutations in patients with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma.
In most patients with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma, tumor development is initiated by somatic inactivation of both alleles of the RB1 gene. However, some of these patients can transmit retinoblastoma predisposition to their offspring. To determine the frequency and nature of constitutional RB1-gene mutations in patients with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma, we analyzed DNA from peripheral blood and from tumor tissue. The analysis of tumors from 54 (71%) of 76 informative patients showed loss of constitutional heterozygosity (LOH) at intragenic loci. Three of 13 uninformative patients had constitutional deletions. For 39 randomly selected tumors, SSCP, hetero-duplex analysis, sequencing, and Southern blot analysis were used to identify mutations. Mutations were detected in 21 (91%) of 23 tumors with LOH. In 6 (38%) of 16 tumors without LOH, one mutation was detected, and in 9 (56%) of the tumors without LOH, both mutations were found. Thus, a total of 45 mutations were identified in tumors of 36 patients. Thirty-nine of the mutations-including 34 small mutations, 2 large structural alterations, and hypermethylation in 3 tumors-were not detected in the corresponding peripheral blood DNA. In 6 (17%) of the 36 patients, a mutation was detected in constitutional DNA, and 1 of these mutations is known to be associated with reduced expressivity. The presence of a constitutional mutation was not associated with an early age at treatment. In 1 patient, somatic mosaicism was demonstrated by molecular analysis of DNA and RNA from peripheral blood. In 2 patients without a detectable mutation in peripheral blood, mosaicism was suggested because 1 of the patients showed multifocal tumors and the other later developed bilateral retinoblastoma. In conclusion, our results emphasize that the manifestation and transmissibility of retinoblastoma depend on the nature of the first mutation, its time in development, and the number and types of cells that are affected.. 

unilateral retinoblastoma
The RB1 gene mutation in a child with ectopic intracranial retinoblastoma.
The RB1 gene mutation was investigated in a child with ectopic intracranial retinoblastoma using DNA obtained from both the pineal and retinal tumours of the patient. A nonsense mutation in exon 17 (codon 556) of the RB1 gene was found to be present homozygously in both the retinal and the pineal tumours. The same mutation was present heterozygously in the DNA from the constitutional cells of the patient, proving it to be of germline origin. The initial mutation was shown to have occurred in the paternally derived RB1 allele. The mutation is in an area of the gene that encodes the protein-binding region known as the pocket region and has been detected in other cases of retinoblastoma.. 

A novel missense mutation in patients from a retinoblastoma pedigree showing only mild expression of the tumor phenotype.
We have used single strand conformation polymorphism analysis to study the 27 exons of the RB1 gene in individuals from a family showing mild expression of the retinoblastoma phenotype. In this family affected individuals developed unilateral tumors and, as a result of linkage analysis, unaffected mutation carriers were also identified within the pedigree. A single band shift using SSCP was identified in exon 21 which resulted in a missense mutation converting a cys-- > arg at nucleotide position 28 in the exon. The mutation destroyed an NdeI restriction enzyme site. Analysis of all family members demonstrated that the missense mutation co-segregated with patients with tumors or who, as a result of linkage analysis had been predicted to carry the predisposing mutation. These observations point to another region of the RB1 gene where mutations only modify the function of the gene and raise important questions for genetic counseling in families with these distinctive phenotypes.. 
