W474C amino acid substitution affects early processing of the alpha-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A and is associated with subacute G(M2) gangliosidosis.
Mutations in the HEXA gene, encoding the alpha-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A (Hex A), that abolish Hex A enzyme activity cause Tay-Sachs disease (TSD), the fatal infantile form of G (M2) gangliosidosis, Type 1. Less severe, subacute (juvenile-onset) and chronic (adult-onset) variants are characterized by a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations and are associated with residual levels of Hex A enzyme activity. We identified a 1422 G-- > C (amino acid W474C) substitution in the first position of exon 13 of HEXA of a non-Jewish proband who manifested a subacute variant of G (M2) gangliosidosis. On the second maternally inherited allele, we identified the common infantile disease-causing 4-bp insertion, + TATC 1278, in exon 11. Pulse-chase analysis using proband fibroblasts revealed that the W474C-containing alpha-subunit precursor was normally synthesized, but not phosphorylated or secreted, and the mature lysosomal alpha-subunit was not detected. When the W474C-containing alpha-subunit was transiently co-expressed with the beta-subunit to produce Hex A (alphabeta) in COS-7 cells, the mature alpha-subunit was present, but its level was much lower than that from normal alpha-subunit transfections, although higher than in those cells transfected with an alpha-subunit associated with infantile TSD. Furthermore, the precursor level of the W474C alpha-subunit was found to accumulate in comparison to the normal alpha-subunit precursor levels. We conclude that the 1422 G-- > C mutation is the cause of Hex A enzyme deficiency in the proband. The resulting W474C substitution clearly interferes with alpha-subunit processing, but because the base substitution falls at the first position of exon 13, aberrant splicing may also contribute to Hex A deficiency in this proband.. 

Tay-Sachs disease
Low levels of beta hexosaminidase A in healthy individuals with apparent deficiency of this enzyme.
Appreciable beta hexosaminidase A (hex A) activity has been detected in cultured skin fibroblasts and melanoma tissue from healthy individuals previously reported as having deficiency of hex A activity indistinguishable from that of patients with Tay-Sachs disease (TSD). Identification and quantitation of hex A, amounting to 3. 5% -6. 9% of total beta hexosaminidase activity, has been obtained by cellulose acetate gel electrophoresis, DEAE-cellulose ion-exchange chromatography, radial immunodiffusion, and radioimmunoassay. Previous family studies suggested that these individuals may be compound heterozygotes for the common mutant TSD gene and a rare (allelic) mutant gene. Thus, the postulated rate mutant gene appears to code for the expression of low amounts of hex A. Heterozygotes for the rare mutant may be indistinguishable from heterozygotes for the common TSD mutant. However, direct visualization and quantitation of hex A by the methods described may prevent false-positive prenatal diagnosis of TSD in fetuses having the incomplete hex A deficiency of the type described in the four healthy individuals 
