Missense mutations in the most ancient residues of the PAX6 paired domain underlie a spectrum of human congenital eye malformations.
Mutations of the human PAX6 gene underlie aniridia (congenital absence of the iris), a rare dominant malformation of the eye. The spectrum of PAX6 mutations in aniridia patients is highly biased, with 92% of all reported mutations leading to premature truncation of the protein (nonsense, splicing, insertions and deletions) and just 2% leading to substitution of one amino acid by another (missense). The extraordinary conservation of the PAX6 protein at the amino acid level amongst vertebrates predicts that pathological missense mutations should in fact be common even though they are hardly ever seen in aniridia patients. This indicates that there is a heavy ascertainment bias in the selection of patients for PAX6 mutation analysis and that the missing PAX6 missense mutations frequently may underlie phenotypes distinct from textbook aniridia. Here we present four novel PAX6 missense mutations, two in association with atypical phenotypes  ectopia pupillae (displaced pupils) and congenital nystagmus (searching gaze), and two in association with more recognizable aniridia phenotypes. Strikingly, all four mutations are located within the PAX6 paired domain and affect amino acids which are highly conserved in all known paired domain proteins. Our results support the hypothesis that the under-representation of missense mutations is caused by ascertainment bias and suggest that a substantial burden of PAX6 -related disease remains to be uncovered.. 

aniridia
Truncation mutations in the transactivation region of PAX6 result in dominant-negative mutants.
PAX6 is a transcription factor with two DNA-binding domains (paired box and homeobox) and a proline-serine-threonine (PST) -rich transactivation domain. PAX6 regulates eye development in animals ranging from jellyfish to Drosophila to humans. Heterozygous mutations in the human PAX6 gene result in various phenotypes, including aniridia, Peters anomaly, autosomal dominant keratitis, and familial foveal dysplasia. It is believed that the mutated allele of PAX6 produces an inactive protein and aniridia is caused due to genetic haploinsufficiency. However, several truncation mutations have been found to occur in the C-terminal half of PAX6 in patients with Aniridia resulting in mutant proteins that retain the DNA-binding domains but have lost most of the transactivation domain. It is not clear whether such mutants really behave as loss-of-function mutants as predicted by haploinsufficiency. Contrary to this theory, our data showed that these mutants are dominant-negative in transient transfection assays when they are coexpressed with wild-type PAX6. We found that the dominant-negative effects result from the enhanced DNA binding ability of these mutants. Kinetic studies of binding and dissociation revealed that various truncation mutants have 3-5-fold higher affinity to various DNA-binding sites when compared with the wild-type PAX6. These results provide a new insight into the role of mutant PAX6 in causing aniridia.. 

PAX6 mutations reviewed.
Mutations in PAX6 are responsible for human aniridia and have also been found in patients with Peters anomaly, with congenital cataracts, with autosomal dominant keratitis, and with isolated foveal hypoplasia. No locus other than chromosome 11p13 has been implicated in aniridia, and PAX6 is clearly the major, if not only, gene responsible. Twenty-eight percent of identified PAX6 mutations are C-T changes at CpG dinucleotides, 20% are splicing errors, and more than 30% are deletion or insertion events. There is a noticeably elevated level of mutation in the paired domain compared with the rest of the gene. Increased mutation in the homeodomain is accounted for by the hypermutable CpG dinucleotide in codon 240. Very nearly all mutations appear to cause loss of function of the mutant allele, and more than 80% of exonic substitutions result in nonsense codons. In a gene with such extraordinarily high sequence conservation throughout evolution, there are presumed undiscovered missense mutations, these are hypothesized to exist in as-yet unidentified phenotypes.. 
