Molecular analysis of the APC gene in 205 families: extended genotype-phenotype correlations in FAP and evidence for the role of APC amino acid changes in colorectal cancer predisposition.
BACKGROUND/AIMS  The development of colorectal cancer and a variable range of extracolonic manifestations in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is the result of the dominant inheritance of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations. In this study, direct mutation analysis of the APC gene was performed to determine genotype-phenotype correlations for nine extracolonic manifestations and to investigate the incidence of APC mutations in non-FAP colorectal cancer. METHODS  The APC gene was analysed in 190 unrelated FAP and 15 non-FAP colorectal cancer patients using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, the protein truncation test, and direct sequencing. RESULTS  Chain terminating signals were only identified in patients belonging to the FAP group (105 patients). Amino acid changes were identified in four patients, three of whom belonged to the non-FAP group of colorectal cancer patients. Genotype-phenotype correlations identified significant differences in the nature of certain extracolonic manifestations in FAP patients belonging to three mutation subgroups. CONCLUSIONS  Extended genotype-phenotype correlations made in this study may have the potential to determine the most appropriate surveillance and prophylactic treatment regimens for those patients with mutations associated with life threatening conditions. This study also provided evidence for the pathological nature of amino acid changes in APC associated with both FAP and non-FAP colorectal cancer patients.. 

colorectal cancer
I1307K APC and hMLH1 mutations in a non-Jewish family with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer.
We describe a French Canadian hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) kindred which carries a novel truncating mutation in hMLH1. Interestingly, the I1307K APC polymorphism, associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer, is also present in this family. The I1307K polymorphism has previously only been identified in individuals of self-reported Ashkenazi Jewish origins. In addition, in this family, there appears to be no relationship between the I1307K polymorphism and the presence or absence of cancer.. 

Genotype-phenotype correlations in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli.
Germ-line mutations of the tumor suppressor APC are implicated in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC), a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). AAPC is recognized by the occurrence of < 100 colonic adenomas and a later onset of colorectal cancer (age > 40 years). The aim of this study was to assess genotype-phenotype correlations in AAPC families. By protein-truncation test (PTT) assay, the entire coding region of the APC gene was screened in affected individuals from 11 AAPC kindreds, and their phenotypic differences were examined. Five novel germ-line APC mutations were identified in seven kindreds. Mutations were located in three different regions of the APC gene  (1) at the 5 end spanning exons 4 and 5, (2) within exon 9, and (3) at the 3 distal end of the gene. Variability in the number of colorectal adenomas was most apparent in individuals with mutations in region 1, and upper-gastrointestinal manifestations were more severe in them. In individuals with mutations in either region 2 or region 3, the average number of adenomas tended to be lower than those in individuals with mutations in region 1, although age at diagnosis was similar. In all AAPC kindreds, a predominance of right-sided colorectal adenomas and rectal polyp sparing was observed. No desmoid tumors were found in these kindreds. Our data suggest that, in AAPC families, the location of the APC mutation may partially predict specific phenotypic expression. This should help in the design of tailored clinical-management protocols in this subset of FAP patients.. 

The APC variants I1307K and E1317Q are associated with colorectal tumors, but not always with a family history.
Classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a high-penetrance autosomal dominant disease that predisposes to hundreds or thousands of colorectal adenomas and carcinoma and that results from truncating mutations in the APC gene. A variant of FAP is attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli, which results from germ-line mutations in the 5 and 3 regions of the APC gene. Attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli patients have " multiple " colorectal adenomas (typically fewer than 100) without the florid phenotype of classical FAP. Another group of patients with multiple adenomas has no mutations in the APC gene, and their phenotype probably results from variation at a locus, or loci, elsewhere in the genome. Recently, however, a missense variant of APC (I1307K) was described that confers an increased risk of colorectal tumors, including multiple adenomas, in Ashkenazim. We have studied a set of 164 patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or carcinoma and analyzed codons 1263-1377 (exon 15G) of the APC gene for germ-line variants. Three patients with the I1307K allele were detected, each of Ashkenazi descent. Four patients had a germ-line E1317Q missense variant of APC that was not present in controls; one of these individuals had an unusually large number of metaplastic polyps of the colorectum. There is increasing evidence that there exist germ-line variants of the APC gene that predispose to the development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinoma, but without the florid phenotype of classical FAP, and possibly with importance for colorectal cancer risk in the general population.. 

Prevalence of the I1307K APC gene variant in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal cancer.
BACKGROUND & AIMS  Israeli Jews of European birth, i. e., Ashkenazim, have the highest colorectal cancer incidence of any Israeli ethnic group. The I1307K APC gene variant was found in 6. 1% of American Jews, 28% of their familial colorectal cancer cases, but not in non-Jews. We assessed the I1307K prevalence in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal cancer. METHODS  DNA samples from 500 unrelated Jews of European or non-European origin, with or without a personal and/or family history of neoplasia, were examined for the I1307K variant by the allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) method. RESULTS  In persons at average risk for colorectal cancer, I1307K was found in 5. 0% of 120 European and 1. 6% of 188 non-European Jews (P = 0. 08). It occurred in 15. 4% of 52 Ashkenazi Israelis with familial cancer (P = 0. 02) and was not detected in 51 non-European Jews at increased cancer risk. Colorectal neoplasia occurred personally or in the families of 13 of 20 Ashkenazi I1307K carriers, 8 of whom also had a personal or family history of noncolonic neoplasia. CONCLUSIONS  The I1307K APC variant may represent a susceptibility gene for colorectal, or other, cancers in Ashkenazi Jews, and partially explains the higher incidence of colorectal cancer in European Israelis.

The APCI1307K allele and cancer risk in a community-based study of Ashkenazi Jews.
Mutations in APC are classically associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a highly penetrant autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple intestinal polyps and, without surgical intervention, the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). APC is a tumour-suppressor gene, and somatic loss occurs in tumours. The germline T-to-A transversion responsible for the APC I1307K allele converts the wild-type sequence to a homopolymer tract (A8) that is genetically unstable and prone to somatic mutation. The I1307K allele was found in 6. 1% of unselected Ashkenazi Jews and higher proportions of Ashkenazim with family or personal histories of CRC (ref. 2). To evaluate the role of I1307K in cancer, we genotyped 5, 081 Ashkenazi volunteers in a community survey. Risk of developing colorectal, breast and other cancers were compared between genotyped I1307K carriers and non-carriers and their first-degree relatives. 

Inherited colorectal polyposis and cancer risk of the APC I1307K polymorphism.
Germ-line and somatic truncating mutations of the APC gene are thought to initiate colorectal tumor formation in familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and sporadic colorectal carcinogenesis, respectively. Recently, an isoleucine-- > lysine polymorphism at codon 1307 (I1307K) of the APC gene has been identified in 6% -7% of the Ashkenazi Jewish population. To assess the risk of this common APC allelic variant in colorectal carcinogenesis, we have analyzed a large cohort of unselected Ashkenazi Jewish subjects with adenomatous polyps and. or colorectal cancer, for the APC I1307K polymorphism. The APC I1307K allele was identified in 48 (10. 1%) of 476 patients. Compared with the frequency in two separate population control groups, the APC I1307K allele is associated with an estimated relative risk of 1. 5-1. 7 for colorectal neoplasia (both P =. 01). Furthermore, compared with noncarriers, APC I1307K carriers had increased numbers of adenomas and colorectal cancers per patient (P =. 03), as well as a younger age at diagnosis. We conclude that the APC I1307K variant leads to increased adenoma formation and directly contributes to 3% -4% of all Ashkenazi Jewish colorectal cancer. The estimated relative risk for carriers may justify specific clinical screening for the 360, 000 Americans expected to harbor this allele, and genetic testing in the setting of long-term-outcome studies may impact significantly on colorectal cancer prevention in this population.
