Cycloheximide facilitates the identification of aberrant transcripts resulting from a novel splice-site mutation in COL17A1 in a patient with generalized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa.
Patients with generalized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa often show decreased expression of type XVII collagen, a transmembrane hemidesmosomal protein encoded by COL17A1. This report documents a novel splice-site mutation in COL17A1 in a patient with generalized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa, and applies a new methodology to define and characterize the resulting mRNA splice variants. Mutational analysis of COL17A1 identified a maternally inherited G-to-T transversion at the -1 position of exon 32. This acceptor splice-site mutation led to the formation of aberrant transcripts present at extremely low levels. Based on our recent finding that cycloheximide stabilized mutant COL17A1 transcripts in keratinocytes homozygous for a frameshift mutation, the effects of the splice-site mutation on splicing of COL17A1 transcripts were determined using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of total RNA from keratinocytes incubated for 2. 5 h in the presence or absence of 10 microg cycloheximide per ml. Using this approach, an abnormally spliced transcript was identified that contains an extra 264 bases upstream from exon 32, resulting in a premature termination codon 27 bp downstream from the cryptic splice site. Three other splice variants, including one derived from the skipping of exon 32, were also identified. These results indicate the usefulness of cycloheximide treatment in evaluating the abnormal processing of mRNA due to splice-site mutations, because  (i) aberrant splicing often generates a premature termination codon, (ii) transcripts with premature termination codons can occur at low or undetectable levels due to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, and (iii) the levels of these transcripts can be increased by cycloheximide. 

atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa
A deletion mutation in COL17A1 in five Austrian families with generalized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa represents propagation of an ancestral allele.
Patients with generalized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa, a usually nonlethal form of junctional epidermolysis bullosa, have generalized blistering, nail dystrophy, patchy alopecia, and dental abnormalities. Skin fragility in most cases is due to mutations in the gene encoding type XVII collagen (COL17A1). Recently, we reported five Austrian families with generalized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa who share the same COL17A1 mutation. Affected individuals in three families are homozygous for 4003delTC, whereas those in two others are compound heterozygotes. To determine if the occurrence of 4003delTC in these unrelated families signifies propagation of an ancestral allele or a mutational hot spot, haplotypes were determined for polymorphisms both within and flanking COL17A1. Five intragenic polymorphisms were chosen based on their informativeness. One of these, not previously reported, was 2988 A or C that introduces a new restriction site for Eco0109 I. All the 4003delTC alleles showed the same haplotype for these five polymorphic markers. Fourteen microsatellite polymorphisms were selected based on their high heterozygosity and their location within 10q23-q25 near COL17A1. Three families shared microsatellite polymorphisms covering at most 19 cM, whereas the others shared smaller regions consistent with cross-over events during passage of this mutation through several generations. These results indicate that 4003delTC occurs on a single ancestral allele.. 
