Genotype-phenotype correlations in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli.
Germ-line mutations of the tumor suppressor APC are implicated in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC), a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). AAPC is recognized by the occurrence of < 100 colonic adenomas and a later onset of colorectal cancer (age > 40 years). The aim of this study was to assess genotype-phenotype correlations in AAPC families. By protein-truncation test (PTT) assay, the entire coding region of the APC gene was screened in affected individuals from 11 AAPC kindreds, and their phenotypic differences were examined. Five novel germ-line APC mutations were identified in seven kindreds. Mutations were located in three different regions of the APC gene  (1) at the 5 end spanning exons 4 and 5, (2) within exon 9, and (3) at the 3 distal end of the gene. Variability in the number of colorectal adenomas was most apparent in individuals with mutations in region 1, and upper-gastrointestinal manifestations were more severe in them. In individuals with mutations in either region 2 or region 3, the average number of adenomas tended to be lower than those in individuals with mutations in region 1, although age at diagnosis was similar. In all AAPC kindreds, a predominance of right-sided colorectal adenomas and rectal polyp sparing was observed. No desmoid tumors were found in these kindreds. Our data suggest that, in AAPC families, the location of the APC mutation may partially predict specific phenotypic expression. This should help in the design of tailored clinical-management protocols in this subset of FAP patients.. 

colonic adenomas
The APC variants I1307K and E1317Q are associated with colorectal tumors, but not always with a family history.
Classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a high-penetrance autosomal dominant disease that predisposes to hundreds or thousands of colorectal adenomas and carcinoma and that results from truncating mutations in the APC gene. A variant of FAP is attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli, which results from germ-line mutations in the 5 and 3 regions of the APC gene. Attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli patients have " multiple " colorectal adenomas (typically fewer than 100) without the florid phenotype of classical FAP. Another group of patients with multiple adenomas has no mutations in the APC gene, and their phenotype probably results from variation at a locus, or loci, elsewhere in the genome. Recently, however, a missense variant of APC (I1307K) was described that confers an increased risk of colorectal tumors, including multiple adenomas, in Ashkenazim. We have studied a set of 164 patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or carcinoma and analyzed codons 1263-1377 (exon 15G) of the APC gene for germ-line variants. Three patients with the I1307K allele were detected, each of Ashkenazi descent. Four patients had a germ-line E1317Q missense variant of APC that was not present in controls; one of these individuals had an unusually large number of metaplastic polyps of the colorectum. There is increasing evidence that there exist germ-line variants of the APC gene that predispose to the development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinoma, but without the florid phenotype of classical FAP, and possibly with importance for colorectal cancer risk in the general population.. 

Inherited colorectal polyposis and cancer risk of the APC I1307K polymorphism.
Germ-line and somatic truncating mutations of the APC gene are thought to initiate colorectal tumor formation in familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and sporadic colorectal carcinogenesis, respectively. Recently, an isoleucine-- > lysine polymorphism at codon 1307 (I1307K) of the APC gene has been identified in 6% -7% of the Ashkenazi Jewish population. To assess the risk of this common APC allelic variant in colorectal carcinogenesis, we have analyzed a large cohort of unselected Ashkenazi Jewish subjects with adenomatous polyps and. or colorectal cancer, for the APC I1307K polymorphism. The APC I1307K allele was identified in 48 (10. 1%) of 476 patients. Compared with the frequency in two separate population control groups, the APC I1307K allele is associated with an estimated relative risk of 1. 5-1. 7 for colorectal neoplasia (both P =. 01). Furthermore, compared with noncarriers, APC I1307K carriers had increased numbers of adenomas and colorectal cancers per patient (P =. 03), as well as a younger age at diagnosis. We conclude that the APC I1307K variant leads to increased adenoma formation and directly contributes to 3% -4% of all Ashkenazi Jewish colorectal cancer. The estimated relative risk for carriers may justify specific clinical screening for the 360, 000 Americans expected to harbor this allele, and genetic testing in the setting of long-term-outcome studies may impact significantly on colorectal cancer prevention in this population.
