Maternal disomy and Prader-Willi syndrome consistent with gamete complementation in a case of familial translocation (3;15) (p25;q11.2).
Maternal uniparental disomy (UPD) for chromosome 15 is responsible for an estimated 30% of cases of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). We report on an unusual case of maternal disomy 15 in PWS that is most consistent with adjacent-1 segregation of a paternal t (3; 15) (p25; q11. 2) with simultaneous maternal meiotic nondisjunction for chromosome 15. The patient (J. B.), a 17-year-old white male with PWS, was found to have 47 chromosomes with a supernumerary, paternal der (15) consisting of the short arm and the proximal long arm of chromosome 15, and distal chromosome arm 3p. The t (3; 15) was present in the balanced state in the patients father and a sister. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis demonstrated that the PWS critical region resided on the derivative chromosome 3 and that there was no deletion of the PWS region on the normal pair of 15s present in J. B. Methylation analysis at exon alpha of the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein-associated polypeptide N (SNRPN) gene showed a pattern characteristic of only the maternal chromosome 15 in J. B. Maternal disomy was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction analysis of microsatellite repeats at the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor beta3 subunit (GABRB3) locus. A niece (B. B.) with 45 chromosomes and the derivative 3 but without the der (15) demonstrated a phenotype consistent with that reported for haploinsufficiency of distal 3 p. Uniparental disomy associated with unbalanced segregation of non-Robertsonian translocations has been reported previously but has not, to our knowledge, been observed in a case of PWS. Furthermore, our findings are best interpreted as true gamete complementation resulting in maternal UPD 15 and PWS 

Maternal disomy
Mutation analysis of UBE3A in Angelman syndrome patients.
Angelman syndrome (AS) is caused by chromosome 15q11-q13 deletions of maternal origin, by paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) 15, by imprinting defects, and by mutations in the UBE3A gene. UBE3A encodes a ubiquitin-protein ligase and shows brain-specific imprinting. Here we describe UBE3A coding-region mutations detected by SSCP analysis in 13 AS individuals or families. Two identical de novo 5-bp duplications in exon 16 were found. Among the other 11 unique mutations, 8 were small deletions or insertions predicted to cause frameshifts, 1 was a mutation to a stop codon, 1 was a missense mutation, and 1 was predicted to cause insertion of an isoleucine in the hect domain of the UBE3A protein, which functions in E2 binding and ubiquitin transfer. Eight of the cases were familial, and five were sporadic. In two familial cases and one sporadic case, mosaicism for UBE3A mutations was detected  in the mother of three AS sons, in the maternal grandfather of two AS first cousins, and in the mother of an AS daughter. The frequencies with which we detected mutations were 5 (14%) of 35 in sporadic cases and 8 (80%) of 10 in familial cases.. 

Genomic organization of the UBE3A/E6-AP gene and related pseudogenes.
The UBE3A gene encodes the E6-AP ubiquitin-protein ligase and has recently been shown to be mutated in Angelman syndrome patients who lack 15q11-q13 deletions or chromosome 15 paternal uniparental disomy. Previous UBE3A cDNA analysis has shown a coding region of approximately 2. 6 kb and a 3-untranslated region (UTR) of < 50 bp, whereas Northern analysis has indicated mRNA sizes of 5-8 kb. We have analyzed additional cDNA clones and provide evidence for an additional 0. 5 kb of 5-UTR and > 2 kb of 3-UTR. We have established the genomic organization of UBE3A and the sequence of intron-exon borders. We have also mapped two highly homologous processed pseudogenes, UBE3AP1 and UBE3AP2, to chromosomes 2 and 21, respectively, and determined their genomic organization. These results will form the basis for studies of mutation and imprinting of UBE3A. 
