Genetic mapping of the copper toxicosis locus in Bedlington terriers to dog chromosome 10, in a region syntenic to human chromosome region 2p13-p16.
Abnormal hepatic copper accumulation is recognized as an inherited disorder in man, mouse, rat and dog. The major cause of hepatic copper accumulation in man is a dysfunctional ATP7B gene, causing Wilson disease (WD). Mutations in the ATP7B genes have also been demonstrated in mouse and rat. The ATP7B gene has been excluded in the much rarer human copper overload disease non-Indian childhood cirrhosis, indicating genetic heterogeneity. By investigating the common autosomal recessive copper toxicosis (CT) in Bedlington terriers, we have identified a new locus involved in progressive liver disease. We examined whether the WD gene ATP7B was also causative for CT by investigating the chromosomal co-localization of ATP7B and C04107, using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). C04107 is an anonymous microsatellite marker closely linked to CT. However, BAC clones containing ATP7B and C04107 mapped to the canine chromosome regions CFA22q11 and CFA10q26, respectively, demonstrating that WD cannot be homologous to CT. The copper transport genes CTR1 and CTR2 were also excluded as candidate genes for CT since they both mapped to canine chromosome region CFA11q22. 2-22. 5. A transcribed sequence identified from the C04107-containing BAC was found to be homologous to a gene expressed from human chromosome 2p13-p16, a region devoid of any positional candidate genes. 

inherited disorder
A European multicenter study of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: classification of 105 mutations and a general system for genotype-based prediction of metabolic phenotype.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP) are allelic disorders caused by mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Previous studies have suggested that the highly variable metabolic phenotypes of PAH deficiency correlate with PAH genotypes. We identified both causative mutations in 686 patients from seven European centers. On the basis of the phenotypic characteristics of 297 functionally hemizygous patients, 105 of the mutations were assigned to one of four arbitrary phenotype categories. We proposed and tested a simple model for correlation between genotype and phenotypic outcome. The observed phenotype matched the predicted phenotype in 79% of the cases, and in only 5 of 184 patients was the observed phenotype more than one category away from that expected. Among the seven contributing centers, the proportion of patients for whom the observed phenotype did not match the predicted phenotype was 4% -23% (P <. 0001), suggesting that differences in methods used for mutation detection or phenotype classification may account for a considerable proportion of genotype-phenotype inconsistencies. Our data indicate that the PAH-mutation genotype is the main determinant of metabolic phenotype in most patients with PAH deficiency. In the present study, the classification of 105 PAH mutations may allow the prediction of the biochemical phenotype in > 10, 000 genotypes, which may be useful for the management of hyperphenylalaninemia in newborns. 

Segregation distortion in myotonic dystrophy.
Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant disease which, in the typical pedigree, shows a three generation anticipation cascade. This results in infertility and congenital myotonic dystrophy (CDM) with the disappearance of DM in that pedigree. The concept of segregation distortion, where there is preferential transmission of the larger allele at the DM locus, has been put forward to explain partially the maintenance of DM in the population. In a survey of DM in Northern Ireland, 59 pedigrees were ascertained. Sibships where the status of all the members had been identified were examined to determine the transmission of the DM expansion from affected parents to their offspring. Where the transmitting parent was male, 58. 3% of the offspring were affected, and in the case of a female transmitting parent, 68. 7% were affected. Studies on meiotic drive in DM have shown increased transmission of the larger allele at the DM locus in non-DM heterozygotes for CTGn. This study provides further evidence that the DM expansion tends to be transmitted preferentially.

Somatic instability of the CTG repeat in mice transgenic for the myotonic dystrophy region is age dependent but not correlated to the relative intertissue transcription levels and proliferative capacities.
A (CTG) nexpansion in the 3-untranslated region (UTR) of the DM protein kinase gene (DMPK) is responsible for causing myotonic dystrophy (DM). Major instability, with very large expansions between generations and high levels of somatic mosaicism, is observed in patients. There is a good correlation between repeat size (at least in leucocytes), clinical severity and age of onset. The trinucleotide repeat instability mechanisms involved in DM and other human genetic diseases are unknown. We studied somatic instability by measuring the CTG repeat length at several ages in various tissues of transgenic mice carrying a (CTG) 55expansion surrounded by 45 kb of the human DM region, using small-pool PCR. These mice have been shown to reproduce the intergenerational and somatic instability of the 55 CTG repeat suggesting that surrounding sequences and the chromatin environment are involved in instability mechanisms. As observed in some of the tissues of DM patients, there is a tendency for repeat length and somatic mosaicism to increase with the age of the mouse. Furthermore, we observed no correlation between the somatic mutation rate and tissue proliferation capacity. The somatic mutation rates in different tissues were also not correlated to the relative inter-tissue difference in transcriptional levels of the three genes (DMAHP, DMPK and 59) surrounding the repeat.. 

Two frequent missense mutations in Pendred syndrome.
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by early childhood deafness and goiter. A century after its recognition as a syndrome by Vaughan Pendred, the disease gene (PDS) was mapped to chromosome 7q22-q31. 1 and, recently, found to encode a putative sulfate transporter. We performed mutation analysis of the PDS gene in patients from 14 Pendred families originating from seven countries and identified all mutations. The mutations include three single base deletions, one splice site mutation and 10 missense mutations. One missense mutation (L236P) was found in a homozygous state in two consanguineous families and in a heterozygous state in five additional non-consanguineous families. Another missense mutation (T416P) was found in a homozygous state in one family and in a heterozygous state in four families. Pendred patients in three non-consanguineous families were shown to be compound heterozygotes for L236P and T416P. In total, one or both of these mutations were found in nine of the 14 families analyzed. The identification of two frequent PDS mutations will facilitate the molecular diagnosis of Pendred syndrome. 

Clustering of missense mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia gene in a sporadic T-cell leukaemia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene at 11q22-q23 (ref. 3). The risk of cancer, especially lymphoid neoplasias, is substantially elevated in A-T patients and has long been associated with chromosomal instability. By analysing tumour DNA from patients with sporadic T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL), a rare clonal malignancy with similarities to a mature T-cell leukaemia seen in A-T, we demonstrate a high frequency of ATM mutations in T-PLL. In marked contrast to the ATM mutation pattern in A-T, the most frequent nucleotide changes in this leukaemia were missense mutations. These clustered in the region corresponding to the kinase domain, which is highly conserved in ATM-related proteins in mouse, yeast and Drosophila. The resulting amino-acid substitutions are predicted to interfere with ATP binding or substrate recognition. Two of seventeen mutated T-PLL samples had a previously reported A-T allele. In contrast, no mutations were detected in the p53 gene, suggesting that this tumour suppressor is not frequently altered in this leukaemia. Occasional missense mutations in ATM were also found in tumour DNA from patients with B-cell non-Hodgkins lymphomas (B-NHL) and a B-NHL cell line. The evidence of a significant proportion of loss-of-function mutations and a complete absence of the normal copy of ATM in the majority of mutated tumours establishes somatic inactivation of this gene in the pathogenesis of sporadic T-PLL and suggests that ATM acts as a tumour suppressor. As constitutional DNA was not available, a putative hereditary predisposition to T-PLL will require further investigation.. 

Identification of a novel nonsense mutation and a missense substitution in the vasopressin-neurophysin II gene in two Spanish kindreds with familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus.
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (FNDI) is an autosomal dominant disease caused by deficiency in the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) encoded by the AVP-neurophysin II (AVP-NPII) gene on chromosome 20p13. In this study, we analyzed two families with FNDI using direct automated fluorescent, solid phase, single-stranded DNA sequencing of PCR-amplified AVP-NPII DNA. In one of the families, affected individuals presented a novel nonsense mutation in exon 3 of the gene, consisting in a G to T transition at nucleotide 2101, which produces a stop signal in codon 82 (Glu) of NPII. The premature termination eliminates part of the C-terminal domain of NPII, including a cysteine residue in position 85, which could be involved in the correct folding of the prohormone. In the second family, a G279A substitution at position -1 of the signal peptide was observed in all affected individuals. This missense mutation, which replaces Ala with Thr, is frequent among FNDI patients and is thought to reduce the efficiency of cleavage by signal peptidases.. 

ATM germline mutations in classical ataxia-telangiectasia patients in the Dutch population.
Germline mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). In our study, we have determined the ATM mutation spectrum in 19 classical A-T patients, including some immigrant populations, as well as 12 of Dutch ethnic origin. Both the protein truncation test (PTT) and the restriction endonuclease fingerprinting (REF) method were used and compared for their detection efficiency, identifying 76% and 60% of the mutations, respectively. Most patients were found to be compound heterozygote. Seventeen mutations were distinct, of which 10 were not reported previously. Mutations are small deletions or point mutations frequently affecting splice sites. Moreover, a 16. 7-kb genomic deletion of the 3 end of the gene, most likely a result of recombination between two LINE elements, was identified. The most frequently found mutation, identified in three unrelated Turkish A-T individuals, was previously described to be a Turkish A-T founder mutation. The presence of a founder mutation among relatively small ethnic population groups in Western Europe could indicate a high carrier frequency in such communities. In patients of Dutch ethnic origin, however, no significant founder effect could be identified. The observed genetic heterogeneity including the relative high percentage of splice-site mutations had no reflection on the phenotype. All patients manifested classical A-T and increased cellular radioresistant DNA synthesis. 

Autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus associated with a missense mutation encoding Gly23-->Val in neurophysin II.
Autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (ADNDI) is an inherited disease caused by progressive degeneration of the magnocellular neurons of the hypothalamus leading to decreased ability to produce the hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP). Affected individuals are not symptomatic at birth, but usually develop diabetes insipidus at 1-6 yr of age. The genetic locus of the disease is the AVP-neurophysin II (NPII) gene, and mutations that cause ADNDI have been found in both the signal peptide of the prepro-AVP-NPII precursor and within NPII itself. An affected girl who presented at 9 months of age and her similarly affected younger brother and father were all found to have a novel missense mutation (G1758-- > T) encoding the amino acid substitution Gly23-- > Val within NPII. The mutation was confirmed by restriction endonuclease analysis. A T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the fathers pituitary gland demonstrates an attenuated posterior pituitary bright spot. This mutation may be valuable for developing models of dominantly inherited neurodegeneration, as the early age of onset of symptoms suggests that this mutation may be particularly deleterious to the magnocellular neuron.. 

Mutations of the ATM gene detected in Japanese ataxia-telangiectasia patients: possible preponderance of the two founder mutations 4612del165 and 7883del5.
The ATM (A-T, mutated) gene on human chromosome 11q22. 3 has recently been identified as the gene responsible for the human recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). In order to define the types of disease-causing ATM mutations in Japanese A-T patients as well as to look for possible mutational hotspots, reverse-transcribed RNA derived from ten patients belonging to eight unrelated Japanese A-T families was analyzed for mutations by the restriction endonuclease fingerprinting method. As has been reported by others, mutations that lead to exon skipping or premature protein truncation were also predominant in our mutants. Six different mutations were identified on 12 of the 16 alleles examined. Four were deletions involving a loss of a single exon  exon 7, exon 16, exon 33 or exon 35. The others were minute deletions, 4649delA in exon 33 and 7883del5 in exon 55. The mutations 4612del165 and 7883del5 were found in more than two unrelated families; 44% (7 of 16) of the mutant alleles had one of the two mutations. The 4612del165 mutations in three different families were all ascribed to the same T-- > A substitution at the splice donor site in intron 33. Microsatellite genotyping around the ATM locus also indicated that a common haplotype was shared by the mutant alleles in both mutations. This suggests that these two founder mutations may be predominant among Japanese ATM mutant alleles. 

A novel common missense mutation G301C in the N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase gene in mucopolysaccharidosis IVA.
Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (MPS IVA) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by a genetic defect in N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase (GALNS). In previous studies, we have found two common mutations in Caucasians and Japanese, respectively. To characterize the mutational spectrum in various ethnic groups, mutations in the GALNS gene in Colombian MPS IVA patients were investigated, and genetic backgrounds were extensively analyzed to identify racial origin, based on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) lineages. Three novel missense mutations never identified previously in other populations and found in 16 out of 19 Colombian MPS IVA unrelated alleles account for 84. 2% of the alleles in this study. The G301C and S162F mutations account for 68. 4% and 10. 5% of mutations, respectively, whereas the remaining F69V is limited to a single allele. The skewed prevalence of G301C in only Colombian patients and haplotype analysis by restriction fragment length polymorphisms in the GALNS gene suggest that G301C originated from a common ancestor. Investigation of the genetic background by means of mtDNA lineages indicate that all our patients are probably of native American descent 

Genetic heterogeneity of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, due to TWIST and FGFR mutations.
Thirty-two unrelated patients with features of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, a common autosomal dominant condition of craniosynostosis and limb anomalies, were screened for mutations in TWIST, FGFR2, and FGFR3. Nine novel and three recurrent TWIST mutations were found in 12 families. Seven families were found to have the FGFR3 P250R mutation, and one individual was found to have an FGFR2 VV269-270 deletion. To date, our detection rate for TWIST or FGFR mutations is 68% in our Saethre-Chotzen syndrome patients, including our five patients elsewhere reported with TWIST mutations. More than 35 different TWIST mutations are now known in the literature. The most common phenotypic features, present in more than a third of our patients with TWIST mutations, are coronal synostosis, brachycephaly, low frontal hairline, facial asymmetry, ptosis, hypertelorism, broad great toes, and clinodactyly. Significant intra- and interfamilial phenotypic variability is present for either TWIST mutations or FGFR mutations. The overlap in clinical features and the presence, in the same genes, of mutations for more than one craniosynostotic condition-such as Saethre-Chotzen, Crouzon, and Pfeiffer syndromes-support the hypothesis that TWIST and FGFRs are components of the same molecular pathway involved in the modulation of craniofacial and limb development in humans.. 

Molecular heterogeneity in mucopolysaccharidosis IVA in Australia and Northern Ireland: nine novel mutations including T312S, a common allele that confers a mild phenotype.
Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (MPS IVA) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by a genetic defect in N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase (GALNS). Previous studies of patients from a British-Irish population showed that the I113F mutation is the most common single mutation among MPS IVA patients and produces a severe clinical phenotype. We studied mutations in the GALNS gene from 23 additional MPS IVA patients (15 from Australia, 8 from Northern Ireland), with various clinical phenotypes (severe, 16 cases; intermediate, 4 cases; mild, 3 cases). We found two common mutations that together accounted for 32% of the 44 unrelated alleles in these patients. One is the T312S mutation, a novel mutation found exclusively in milder patients. The other is the previously described I113F that produces a severe phenotype. The I113F and T312S mutations accounted for 8 (18%) and 6 (14%) of 44 unrelated alleles, respectively. The relatively high residual GALNS activity seen when the T312S mutant cDNA is overexpressed in mutant cells provides an explanation for the mild phenotype in patients with this mutation. The distribution and relative frequencies of the I113F and T312S mutations in Australia corresponded to those observed in Northern Ireland and are unique to these two populations, suggesting that both mutations were probably introduced to Australia by Irish migrants during the 19th century. Haplotype analysis using 6 RFLPs provides additional data that the I113F mutation originated from a common ancestor. The other 9 novel mutations identified in these 23 patients were each limited to a single family. These data provide further evidence for extensive allelic heterogeneity in MPS IVA in British-Irish patients and provide evidence for their transmission to Australia by British-Irish migrants.. 

Systematic analysis of coproporphyrinogen oxidase gene defects in hereditary coproporphyria and mutation update.
Hereditary coproporphyria (HC) is an acute hepatic porphyria with autosomal dominant inheritance caused by deficient activity of coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (CPO). Clinical manifestations of the disease are characterized by acute attacks of neurological dysfunction often precipitated by drugs, fasting, cyclical hormonal changes, or infectious diseases. Skin photosensitivity may also be present. The seven exons, the exon/intron boundaries and part of 3 noncoding sequence of the CPO gene were systematically analyzed by an exon-by-exon denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) strategy followed by direct sequencing in seven unrelated heterozygous HC patients from France, Holland, and Czech Republic. Seven novel mutations and two new polymorphisms were detected. Among these mutations  two are missense (G197W, W427R), two are nonsense (Q306X, Q385X), two are small deletions (662de14bp; 1168del3bp removing a glycine at position 390), and one is a splicing mutation (IVS1-15c-- > g) which creates a new acceptor splice site. The pathological significance of the point mutations G197W, W427R, and the in-frame deletion 390delGly were assessed by their respective expression in a prokaryotic system using site-directed mutagenesis. These mutations resulted in the absence or a dramatic decrease of CPO activity. The two polymorphisms were localized in noncoding part of the gene  1) a C/G polymorphism in the promotor region, 142 bp upstream from the transcriptional initiation site (-142C/G), and 2) a 6 bp deletion polymorphism in the 3 noncoding part of the CPO gene, 574 bp downstream of the last base of the normal termination codon (+ 574 delATTCTT). Five intragenic dimorphisms are now well characterized and the high degree of allelic heterogeneity in HC is demonstrated with seven new different mutations making a total of nineteen CPO gene defects reported so far.. 

The APC variants I1307K and E1317Q are associated with colorectal tumors, but not always with a family history.
Classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a high-penetrance autosomal dominant disease that predisposes to hundreds or thousands of colorectal adenomas and carcinoma and that results from truncating mutations in the APC gene. A variant of FAP is attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli, which results from germ-line mutations in the 5 and 3 regions of the APC gene. Attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli patients have " multiple " colorectal adenomas (typically fewer than 100) without the florid phenotype of classical FAP. Another group of patients with multiple adenomas has no mutations in the APC gene, and their phenotype probably results from variation at a locus, or loci, elsewhere in the genome. Recently, however, a missense variant of APC (I1307K) was described that confers an increased risk of colorectal tumors, including multiple adenomas, in Ashkenazim. We have studied a set of 164 patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or carcinoma and analyzed codons 1263-1377 (exon 15G) of the APC gene for germ-line variants. Three patients with the I1307K allele were detected, each of Ashkenazi descent. Four patients had a germ-line E1317Q missense variant of APC that was not present in controls; one of these individuals had an unusually large number of metaplastic polyps of the colorectum. There is increasing evidence that there exist germ-line variants of the APC gene that predispose to the development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinoma, but without the florid phenotype of classical FAP, and possibly with importance for colorectal cancer risk in the general population.. 

The APCI1307K allele and cancer risk in a community-based study of Ashkenazi Jews.
Mutations in APC are classically associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a highly penetrant autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple intestinal polyps and, without surgical intervention, the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). APC is a tumour-suppressor gene, and somatic loss occurs in tumours. The germline T-to-A transversion responsible for the APC I1307K allele converts the wild-type sequence to a homopolymer tract (A8) that is genetically unstable and prone to somatic mutation. The I1307K allele was found in 6. 1% of unselected Ashkenazi Jews and higher proportions of Ashkenazim with family or personal histories of CRC (ref. 2). To evaluate the role of I1307K in cancer, we genotyped 5, 081 Ashkenazi volunteers in a community survey. Risk of developing colorectal, breast and other cancers were compared between genotyped I1307K carriers and non-carriers and their first-degree relatives. 

A genome-wide search for chromosomal loci linked to mental health wellness in relatives at high risk for bipolar affective disorder among the Old Order Amish.
Bipolar affective disorder (BPAD; manic-depressive illness) is characterized by episodes of mania and/or hypomania interspersed with periods of depression. Compelling evidence supports a significant genetic component in the susceptibility to develop BPAD. To date, however, linkage studies have attempted only to identify chromosomal loci that cause or increase the risk of developing BPAD. To determine whether there could be protective alleles that prevent or reduce the risk of developing BPAD, similar to what is observed in other genetic disorders, we used mental health wellness (absence of any psychiatric disorder) as the phenotype in our genome-wide linkage scan of several large multigeneration Old Order Amish pedigrees exhibiting an extremely high incidence of BPAD. We have found strong evidence for a locus on chromosome 4p at D4S2949 (maximum GENEHUNTER-PLUS nonparametric linkage score = 4. 05, P = 5. 22 x 10 (-4); SIBPAL Pempirical value < 3 x 10 (-5)) and suggestive evidence for a locus on chromosome 4q at D4S397 (maximum GENEHUNTER-PLUS nonparametric linkage score = 3. 29, P = 2. 57 x 10 (-3); SIBPAL Pempirical value < 1 x 10 (-3)) that are linked to mental health wellness. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that certain alleles could prevent or modify the clinical manifestations of BPAD and perhaps other related affective disorders.

Detection of heterozygous carriers of the ataxia-telangiectasia (ATM) gene by G2 phase chromosomal radiosensitivity of peripheral blood lymphocytes.
In ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients, mutations in a single gene, ATM, result in an autosomal recessive syndrome that embraces a variety of clinical features and manifests extreme radiosensitivity and a strong pre-disposition to malignancy. Heterozygotes for the ATM gene have no clinical expression of A-T but may be cancer prone with a moderate increase in in vitro radiosensitivity. We performed a blind chromosomal analysis on G2-phase lymphocytes from 7 unrelated A-T patients, 13 obligate A-T heterozygotes (parents of the patients), and 14 normal controls following X-irradiation with 1 Gy in order to evaluate this cytogenetic method as a tool for detection of ATM carriers. Both A-T homozygotes and heterozygotes showed significantly increased levels of radiation-induced chromatid damage relative to that of normal controls. These results show that the G2-phase chromosomal radiosensitivity assay can be used for the detection of A-T heterozygotes. In combination with molecular genetic analyses, this test may be of value in studies of familial and sporadic cancers aimed at determination of the potential involvement of ATM mutations in tumor risk or development.. 

Severe early-onset obesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair pigmentation caused by POMC mutations in humans.
Sequential cleavage of the precursor protein pre-pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) generates the melanocortin peptides adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH), melanocyte-stimulating hormones (MSH) alpha, beta and gamma as well as the opioid-receptor ligand beta-endorphin. While a few cases of isolated ACTH deficiency have been reported (OMIM 201400), an inherited POMC defect has not been described so far. Recent studies in animal models elucidated a central role of alpha-MSH in the regulation of food intake by activation of the brain melanocortin-4-receptor (MC4-R; refs 3-5) and the linkage of human obesity to chromosome 2 in close proximity to the POMC locus, led to the proposal of an association of POMC with human obesity. The dual role of alpha-MSH in regulating food intake and influencing hair pigmentation predicts that the phenotype associated with a defect in POMC function would include obesity, alteration in pigmentation and ACTH deficiency. The observation of these symptoms in two probands prompted us to search for mutations within their POMC genes. Patient 1 was found to be a compound heterozygote for two mutations in exon 3 (G7013T, C7133delta) which interfere with appropriate synthesis of ACTH and alpha-MSH. Patient 2 was homozygous for a mutation in exon 2 (C3804A) which abolishes POMC translation. These findings represent the first examples of a genetic defect within the POMC gene and define a new monogenic endocrine disorder resulting in early-onset obesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair pigmentation.. 

Identification of a novel mutation of the CPO gene in a Japanese hereditary coproporphyria family.
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by a deficiency of coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPO) caused by a mutation in the CPO gene. Only 11 mutations of the gene have been reported in HCP patients. We report another mutation in a Japanese family. Polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformational polymorphism and direct sequence analyses demonstrated a C to T substitution in exon 1 of the CPO gene at nucleotide position 85, which lies in the putative presequence for targeting to mitochondria. This mutation changes the codon for glutamine to a termination codon at amino acid position 29. MaeI restriction analysis showed two other carriers in the family. The C-T mutation is located within a recently proposed putative alternative translation initiation codon (TIC-1), supporting that TIC-1 is the real TIC rather than TIC-2.. 
