Low frequency of BRCA1 germline mutations in 45 German breast/ovarian cancer families.
In this study we investigated 45 German breast/ovarian cancer families for germline mutations in the BRCA1 gene. We identified four germline mutations in three breast cancer families and in one breast-ovarian cancer family. among these were one frameshift mutation, one nonsense mutation, one novel splice site mutation, and one missense mutation. The missense mutation was also found in 2. 8% of the general population, suggesting that it is not disease associated. The average age of disease onset in those families harbouring causative mutations was between 32. 3 and 37. 4 years, whereas the family harbouring the missense mutation had an average age of onset of 51. 2 years. These findings show that BRCA1 is implicated in a small fraction of breast/ovarian cancer families suggesting the involvement of another susceptibility gene (s) 

breast/ovarian cancer
Oral contraceptives and the risk of hereditary ovarian cancer. Hereditary Ovarian Cancer Clinical Study Group.
BACKGROUND  Women with mutations in either the BRCA1 or the BRCA2 gene have a high lifetime risk of ovarian cancer. Oral contraceptives protect against ovarian cancer in general, but it is not known whether they also protect against hereditary forms of ovarian cancer. METHODS  We enrolled 207 women with hereditary ovarian cancer and 161 of their sisters as controls in a case-control study. All the patients carried a pathogenic mutation in either BRCA1 (179 women) or BRCA2 (28 women). The control women were enrolled regardless of whether or not they had either mutation. Lifetime histories of oral-contraceptive use were obtained by interview or by written questionnaire and were compared between patients and control women, after adjustment for year of birth and parity. RESULTS  The adjusted odds ratio for ovarian cancer associated with any past use of oral contraceptives was 0. 5 (95 percent confidence interval, 0. 3 to 0. 8). The risk decreased with increasing duration of use (P for trend, < 0. 001); use for six or more years was associated with a 60 percent reduction in risk. Oral-contraceptive use protected against ovarian cancer both for carriers of the BRCA1 mutation (odds ratio, 0. 5; 95 percent confidence interval, 0. 3 to 0. 9) and for carriers of the BRCA2 mutation (odds ratio, 0. 4; 95 percent confidence interval, 0. 2 to 1. 1). CONCLUSIONS  Oral-contraceptive use may reduce the risk of ovarian cancer in women with pathogenic mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene 

Founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in French Canadian breast and ovarian cancer families.
We have identified four mutations in each of the breast cancer-susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, in French Canadian breast cancer and breast/ovarian cancer families from Quebec. To identify founder effects, we examined independently ascertained French Canadian cancer families for the distribution of these eight mutations. Mutations were found in 41 of 97 families. Six of eight mutations were observed at least twice. The BRCA1 C4446T mutation was the most common mutation found, followed by the BRCA2 8765delAG mutation. Together, these mutations were found in 28 of 41 families identified to have a mutation. The odds of detection of any of the four BRCA1 mutations was 18. 7x greater if one or more cases of ovarian cancer were also present in the family. The odds of detection of any of the four BRCA2 mutations was 5. 3x greater if there were at least five cases of breast cancer in the family. Interestingly, the presence of a breast cancer case < 36 years of age was strongly predictive of the presence of any of the eight mutations screened. Carriers of the same mutation, from different families, shared similar haplotypes, indicating that the mutant alleles were likely to be identical by descent for a mutation in the founder population. The identification of common BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations will facilitate carrier detection in French Canadian breast cancer and breast/ovarian cancer families.

Stable interaction between the products of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes in mitotic and meiotic cells.
BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for most cases of familial, early onset breast and/or ovarian cancer and encode products that each interact with hRAD51. Results presented here show that BRCA1 and BRCA2 coexist in a biochemical complex and colocalize in subnuclear foci in somatic cells and on the axial elements of developing synaptonemal complexes. Like BRCA1 and RAD51, BRCA2 relocates to PCNA + replication sites following exposure of S phase cells to hydroxyurea or UV irradiation. Thus, BRCA1 and BRCA2 participate, together, in a pathway (s) associated with the activation of double-strand break repair and/or homologous recombination. Dysfunction of this pathway may be a general phenomenon in the majority of cases of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer.. 

The 185delAG BRCA1 mutation originated before the dispersion of Jews in the diaspora and is not limited to Ashkenazim.
The 185delAG mutation in BRCA1 is detected in Ashkenazi Jews both in familial breast and ovarian cancer and in the general population. All tested Ashkenazi mutation carriers share the same allelic pattern at the BRCA1 locus. Our previous study showed that this Ashkenazi mutation also occurs in Iraqi Jews with a similar allelic pattern. We extended our analysis to other non-Ashkenazi subsets  354 of Moroccan origin, 200 Yemenites and 150 Iranian Jews. Heteroduplex analysis complemented by direct DNA sequencing of abnormally migrating bands were employed. Four of Moroccan origin (1. 1%) and none of the Yemenites or Iranians was a carrier of the 185delAG mutation. BRCA1 allelic patterns were determined for four of these individuals and for 12 additional non-Ashkenazi 185delAG mutation carriers who had breast/ovarian cancer. Six non-Ashkenazi individuals shared the common Ashkenazi haplotype, four had a closely related pattern, and the rest (n = 6) displayed a distinct BRCA1 allelic pattern. We conclude that the 185delAG BRCA1 mutation occurs in some non-Ashkenazi populations at rates comparable with that of Ashkenazim. The majority of Jewish 185delAG mutation carriers have a common allelic pattern, supporting the founder effect notion, but dating the mutations origin to an earlier date than currently estimated. However, the different allelic pattern at the BRCA1 locus even in some Jewish mutation carriers, might suggest that the mutation arose independently.. 

BRCA1 required for transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA damage.
The breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 encodes a zinc finger protein of unknown function. Association of the BRCA1 protein with the DNA repair protein Rad51 and changes in the phosphorylation and cellular localization of the protein after exposure to DNA-damaging agents are consistent with a role for BRCA1 in DNA repair. Here, it is shown that mouse embryonic stem cells deficient in BRCA1 are defective in the ability to carry out transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA damage, and are hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and hydrogen peroxide. These results suggest that BRCA1 participates, directly or indirectly, in transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA damage.. 

Cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 proteins in discrete nuclear domains.
Germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene predispose women to early-onset breast and ovarian cancer by compromising the genes presumptive function as a tumor suppressor. Although the biochemical properties of BRCA1 polypeptides are not understood, their expression pattern and subcellular localization suggest a role in cell-cycle regulation. When resting cells are induced to proliferate, the steady-state levels of BRCA1 increase in late G1 and reach a maximum during S phase. Moreover, in S phase cells, BRCA1 polypeptides are hyperphosphorylated and accumulate into discrete subnuclear foci termed " BRCA1 nuclear dots. " BRCA1 associates in vivo with a structurally related protein termed BARD1. Here we show that the steady-state levels of BARD1, unlike those of BRCA1, remain relatively constant during cell cycle progression. However, immunostaining revealed that BARD1 resides within BRCA1 nuclear dots during S phase of the cell cycle, but not during the G1 phase. Nevertheless, BARD1 polypeptides are found exclusively in the nuclear fractions of both G1- and S-phase cells. Therefore, progression to S phase is accompanied by the aggregation of nuclear BARD1 polypeptides into BRCA1 nuclear dots. This cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 indicates a role for BARD1 in BRCA1-mediated tumor suppression. 

Genetic heterogeneity and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer families. The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium.
The contribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to inherited breast cancer was assessed by linkage and mutation analysis in 237 families, each with at least four cases of breast cancer, collected by the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Families were included without regard to the occurrence of ovarian or other cancers. Overall, disease was linked to BRCA1 in an estimated 52% of families, to BRCA2 in 32% of families, and to neither gene in 16% (95% confidence interval [CI] 6% -28%), suggesting other predisposition genes. The majority (81%) of the breast-ovarian cancer families were due to BRCA1, with most others (14%) due to BRCA2. Conversely, the majority of families with male and female breast cancer were due to BRCA2 (76%). The largest proportion (67%) of families due to other genes was found in families with four or five cases of female breast cancer only. These estimates were not substantially affected either by changing the assumed penetrance model for BRCA1 or by including or excluding BRCA1 mutation data. Among those families with disease due to BRCA1 that were tested by one of the standard screening methods, mutations were detected in the coding sequence or splice sites in an estimated 63% (95% CI 51% -77%). The estimated sensitivity was identical for direct sequencing and other techniques. The penetrance of BRCA2 was estimated by maximizing the LOD score in BRCA2-mutation families, over all possible penetrance functions. The estimated cumulative risk of breast cancer reached 28% (95% CI 9% -44%) by age 50 years and 84% (95% CI 43% -95%) by age 70 years. The corresponding ovarian cancer risks were 0. 4% (95% CI 0% -1%) by age 50 years and 27% (95% CI 0% -47%) by age 70 years. The lifetime risk of breast cancer appears similar to the risk in BRCA1 carriers, but there was some suggestion of a lower risk in BRCA2 carriers < 50 years of age. 

Localization of human BRCA1 and its loss in high-grade, non-inherited breast carcinomas.
Although the link between the BRCA1 tumour-suppressor gene and hereditary breast and ovarian cancer is established, the role, if any, of BRCA1 in non-familial cancers is unclear. BRCA1 mutations are rare in sporadic cancers, but loss of BRCA1 resulting from reduced expression or incorrect subcellular localization is postulated to be important in non-familial breast and ovarian cancers. Epigenetic loss, however, has not received general acceptance due to controversy regarding the subcellular localization of BRCA1 proteins, reports of which have ranged from exclusively nuclear, to conditionally nuclear, to the ER/golgi, to cytoplasmic invaginations into the nucleus. In an attempt to resolve this issue, we have comprehensively characterized 19 anti-BRCA1 antibodies. These reagents detect a 220-kD protein localized in discrete nuclear foci in all epithelial cell lines, including those derived from breast malignancies. Immunohistochemical staining of human breast specimens also revealed BRCA1 nuclear foci in benign breast, invasive lobular cancers and low-grade ductal carcinomas. Conversely, BRCA1 expression was reduced or undetectable in the majority of high-grade, ductal carcinomas, suggesting that absence of BRCA1 may contribute to the pathogenesis of a significant percentage of sporadic breast cancers.. 
