Molecular defects leading to human complement component C6 deficiency in an African-American family.
Complement component C6 deficiency (C6D) was diagnosed in a 16-year-old African-American male with meningococcal meningitis. The patients father and two brothers also had C6D, but gave no history of meningitis or other neisserial infection. By using exon-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR)/single-strand conformation polymorphism as a screening step and nucleotide sequencing of target exons, we determined that the proband was a compound heterozygote for two C6 gene mutations. The first, 1195delC located in exon 7, is a novel mutation, while the second, 1936delG in exon 12, has been described before to cause C6D in an unrelated African-American individual. Both mutations result in premature termination codons and C6 null alleles. Allele-specific PCR indicated that the probands two brothers also inherited the 1195delC mutation from their heterozygous mother and the 1936delG mutation from their homozygous father.. 

complement component C6 deficiency
The molecular basis of C6 deficiency in the western Cape, South Africa.
Deficiency of the sixth component of human complement (C6) has been reported in a number of families from the western Cape, South Africa. Meningococcal disease is endemic in the Cape and almost all pedigrees of total C6 deficiency (C6Q0) have been ascertained because of recurrent disease. We have sequenced the expressed exons of the C6 gene from selected cases and have found three molecular defects leading to total deficiency  879delG, which is the common defect in the Cape and hitherto unreported, and 1195delC and 1936delG, which have been previously reported in African-Americans. We also show that the 879delG and 1195delC defects are associated with characteristic C6/C7 region DNA marker haplotypes, although small variations were observed. The 1936delG defect was observed only once in the Cape, but its associated haplotype could be deduced. The data from the haplotypes indicate that these three molecular defects account for the defects in all the 38 unrelated C6Q0 individuals we have studied from the Cape. We have also observed the 879delG defect in two Dutch C6-deficient kindreds, but the 879delG defect in the Cape probably did not come from The Netherlands.. 
