Identification of a novel nonsense mutation and a missense substitution in the vasopressin-neurophysin II gene in two Spanish kindreds with familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus.
Familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (FNDI) is an autosomal dominant disease caused by deficiency in the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) encoded by the AVP-neurophysin II (AVP-NPII) gene on chromosome 20p13. In this study, we analyzed two families with FNDI using direct automated fluorescent, solid phase, single-stranded DNA sequencing of PCR-amplified AVP-NPII DNA. In one of the families, affected individuals presented a novel nonsense mutation in exon 3 of the gene, consisting in a G to T transition at nucleotide 2101, which produces a stop signal in codon 82 (Glu) of NPII. The premature termination eliminates part of the C-terminal domain of NPII, including a cysteine residue in position 85, which could be involved in the correct folding of the prohormone. In the second family, a G279A substitution at position -1 of the signal peptide was observed in all affected individuals. This missense mutation, which replaces Ala with Thr, is frequent among FNDI patients and is thought to reduce the efficiency of cleavage by signal peptidases.. 

familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus
Autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus associated with a missense mutation encoding Gly23-->Val in neurophysin II.
Autosomal dominant neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (ADNDI) is an inherited disease caused by progressive degeneration of the magnocellular neurons of the hypothalamus leading to decreased ability to produce the hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP). Affected individuals are not symptomatic at birth, but usually develop diabetes insipidus at 1-6 yr of age. The genetic locus of the disease is the AVP-neurophysin II (NPII) gene, and mutations that cause ADNDI have been found in both the signal peptide of the prepro-AVP-NPII precursor and within NPII itself. An affected girl who presented at 9 months of age and her similarly affected younger brother and father were all found to have a novel missense mutation (G1758-- > T) encoding the amino acid substitution Gly23-- > Val within NPII. The mutation was confirmed by restriction endonuclease analysis. A T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the fathers pituitary gland demonstrates an attenuated posterior pituitary bright spot. This mutation may be valuable for developing models of dominantly inherited neurodegeneration, as the early age of onset of symptoms suggests that this mutation may be particularly deleterious to the magnocellular neuron.. 
